JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Welcome to this "PBS NewsHour"
special coverage of the first
debate between the two
major-party
presidential candidates, Hillary
Clinton and Donald Trump.
The stage is set at Hofstra
University on Long Island, New
York.
With the election 43 days away
the race tightening, a lot is on
the line tonight, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It certainly is,
Gwen, and given that this is the
first time these two
have faced each
other one on one.
Lester Holt of NBC News
will be moderating.
Joining us at the table are our
regular contributors, syndicated
columnist Mark Shields, New York
Times columnist David Brooks,
and from The Cook Political
Report, Amy Walter.
We welcome all you have here
for the next two hours.
Amy, let's start with you.
What are you looking for?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Each of these candidates
has an enthusiasm gap
problem within their own party.
So, they have got to get
their partisans fired up.
For Hillary Clinton,
it's young people.
For Donald Trump, he's got to
get those white college-educated
voters back into the Republican
fold, where they have been.
And then they have got to get
those voters, both of them, who
are torn, don't like either
choice they have in front
of them, to pick them.
GWEN IFILL: Mark Shields, what
would you... surprise you the
most of what these candidates
might
or might not do tonight?
MARK SHIELDS: Does Donald
Trump dare to be boring?
Does he come out
sedated/presidential?
And can Hillary Clinton, who is
a marvelous and superior
deliverer of information, make
an emotional connection
with American voters?
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, what are
you on the edge of your seat
looking for?
DAVID BROOKS: We have been
around each other too long.
I wrote down emotional
connection.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: Did you?
DAVID BROOKS: This is
not a cognitive night.
This is not philosophy.
This is not grand strategy.
It's moment of intimacy, that
unscripted moment when the
unconscious is revealed that
will
be replayed on YouTube over
and over and over again.
And so it's just, is he
commanding or is he cruel?
Is she relatable and does
she seem calmly smart?
And it's whether people get that
vibe, the first they vibe, that
will determine the night.
GWEN IFILL: Is this about what
they know or who they are?
AMY WALTER: Well, I think it's
mostly about who they are.
For voters at this stage of the
game, they are looking up on
that dais to see who they
can spend the next four years
with, who they want to invite
into their homes moment after
moment.
Many voters say, I don't want
either one of them in there.
GWEN IFILL: A lot of them.
AMY WALTER: A lot of
voters are saying that.
But this is the one maybe that
they're not going to like, but
they will feel comfortable
enough.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Mark, people
are going to be fact-checking
this debate.
They're going to be raising
questions about whether what
either one of them said was
correct
or not.
MARK SHIELDS: No,
you're right, Judy.
And if it's what they know,
it will be a short evening...
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: for the Republican
nominee, whose knowledge bank
has been overdrawn.
And I think it's about, more
than anything else, each case,
what does he know, his command
of it, is he comfortable
with it, and who she is.
And I think that is
really the question.
DAVID BROOKS: And there
is the gender politics.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
Well, we're turning now to
Lester Holt of NBC News.
TRANSCRIPT START
HOLT: Good evening from Hofstra
University in Hempstead, New
York.
I'm Lester Holt, anchor
of "NBC Nightly News."
I want to welcome you to the
first presidential debate.
The participants tonight are
Donald Trump and Hillary
Clinton.
This debate is sponsored by the
Commission on Presidential
Debates, a nonpartisan,
nonprofit
organization.
The commission drafted tonight's
format, and the rules have been
agreed to by the campaigns.
The 90-minute debate is divided
into six segments, each 15
minutes long.
We'll explore three topic areas
tonight: Achieving prosperity;
America's direction; and
securing
America.
At the start of each segment, I
will ask the same lead-off
question to both candidates,
and they will each have up
to two minutes to respond.
From that point until the end of
the segment, we'll have an open
discussion.
The questions are mine and have
not been shared with the
commission or the campaigns.
The audience here in the room
has agreed to remain silent so
that we can focus on what
the candidates are saying.
I will invite you to applaud,
however, at this moment, as we
welcome the candidates:
Democratic nominee for president
of the United States, Hillary
Clinton, and Republican nominee
for president of the United
States, Donald J. Trump.
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: How are you, Donald?
HOLT: Good luck to you.
(APPLAUSE)
Well, I don't expect us to cover
all the issues of this campaign
tonight, but I remind everyone,
there are two more presidential
debates scheduled.
We are going to focus on many of
the issues that voters tell us
are most important, and
we're going to press
for specifics.
I am honored to have this role,
but this evening belongs to the
candidates and, just as
important,
to the American people.
Candidates, we look forward to
hearing you articulate your
policies and your positions,
as well as your visions
and your values.
So, let's begin.
We're calling this opening
segment "Achieving Prosperity."
And central to that is jobs.
There are two economic
realities in America today.
There's been a record six
straight years of job growth,
and new census numbers show
incomes
have increased at a record rate
after years of stagnation.
However, income inequality
remains significant, and nearly
half of Americans are living
paycheck
to paycheck.
Beginning with you, Secretary
Clinton, why are you a better
choice than your opponent
to create the kinds of jobs that
will put more money into the
pockets of American works?
CLINTON: Well, thank you,
Lester, and thanks to Hofstra
for hosting us.
The central question in this
election is really what kind of
country we want to be and what
kind of future we'll
build together.
Today is my granddaughter's
second birthday, so I think
about this a lot.
First, we have to build an
economy that works for everyone,
not just those at the top.
That means we need new jobs,
good jobs, with rising incomes.
I want us to invest in you.
I want us to invest
in your future.
That means jobs in
infrastructure, in advanced
manufacturing, innovation and
technology,
clean, renewable energy, and
small business, because most of
the new jobs will come from
small business.
We also have to make
the economy fairer.
That starts with raising the
national minimum wage and also
guarantee, finally, equal pay
for women's work.
CLINTON: I also want to see more
companies do profit-sharing.
If you help create the profits,
you should be able to share in
them, not just the executives
at the top.
And I want us to do more to
support people who are
struggling to balance family and
work.
I've heard from so many of you
about the difficult choices you
face and the stresses that
you're
under.
So let's have paid family
leave, earned sick days.
Let's be sure we have affordable
child care and debt-free
college.
How are we going to do it?
We're going to do it by having
the wealthy pay their fair share
and close the corporate
loopholes.
Finally, we tonight are on the
stage together, Donald Trump and
I. Donald, it's good to be
with you.
We're going to have a debate
where we are talking about the
important issues facing
our country.
You have to judge us, who can
shoulder the immense, awesome
responsibilities of the
presidency,
who can put into action the
plans that will make your life
better.
I hope that I will be able to
earn your vote on November 8th.
HOLT: Secretary
Clinton, thank you.
Mr. Trump, the same
question to you.
It's about putting money... more
money into the pockets of
American workers.
You have up to two minutes.
TRUMP: 21:08:32
Thank you, Lester.
Our jobs are fleeing
the country.
They're going to Mexico.
They're going to many
other countries.
You look at what China is doing
to our country in terms of
making our product.
They're devaluing their
currency, and there's nobody in
our government to fight them.
And we have a very good fight.
And we have a winning fight.
Because they're using our
country as a piggy bank to
rebuild China, and many other
countries
are doing the same thing.
So we're losing our good
jobs, so many of them.
When you look at what's
happening in Mexico, a friend of
mine who builds plants said it's
the eighth wonder of the world.
They're building some of the
biggest plants anywhere in the
world, some of the most
sophisticated,
some of the best plants.
With the United States,
as he said, not so much.
So Ford is leaving.
You see that, their small
car division leaving.
Thousands of jobs leaving
Michigan, leaving Ohio.
They're all leaving.
And we can't allow it
to happen anymore.
As far as child care is
concerned and so many other
things, I think Hillary and I
agree
on that.
We probably disagree a little
bit as to numbers and amounts
and what we're going to do, but
perhaps we'll be talking
about that later.
But we have to stop our jobs
from being stolen from us.
We have to stop our companies
from leaving the United States
and, with it, firing all
of their people.
All you have to do is take a
look at Carrier air conditioning
in Indianapolis.
They left... fired 1,400 people.
They're going to Mexico.
So many hundreds and hundreds
of companies are doing this.
TRUMP: We cannot let it happen.
Under my plan, I'll be reducing
taxes tremendously, from 35
percent to 15 percent for
companies,
small and big businesses.
That's going to be a job creator
like we haven't seen since
Ronald Reagan.
It's going to be a
beautiful thing to watch.
Companies will come.
They will build.
They will expand.
New companies will start.
And I look very, very
much forward to doing it.
We have to renegotiate our trade
deals, and we have to stop these
countries from stealing
our companies and our jobs.
HOLT: Secretary Clinton,
would you like to respond?
CLINTON: Well, I think that
trade is an important issue.
Of course, we are 5 percent of
the world's population; we have
to trade with the other
95 percent.
And we need to have
smart, fair trade deals.
We also, though, need to have a
tax system that rewards work and
not just financial transactions.
And the kind of plan that Donald
has put forth would be
trickle-down economics all over
again.
In fact, it would be the most
extreme version, the biggest tax
cuts for the top percent of
the people in this country
than we've ever had.
I call it trumped-up
trickle-down, because that's
exactly what it would be.
That is not how we
grow the economy.
We just have a different view
about what's best for growing
the economy, how we make
investments that will actually
produce jobs and rising incomes.
I think we come at it from
somewhat different perspectives.
I understand that.
You know, Donald was very
fortunate in his life, and
that's all to his benefit.
He started his business with $14
million, borrowed from his
father, and he really believes
that the more you help wealthy
people, the better off we'll be
and that everything will
work out from there.
I don't buy that.
I have a different experience.
My father was a
small-businessman.
He worked really hard.
He printed drapery fabrics on
long tables, where he pulled out
those fabrics and he went
down with a silkscreen and
dumped the paint in and took the
squeegee and kept going.
And so what I believe is the
more we can do for the middle
class, the more we can invest
in you, your education, your
skills, your future, the better
we will be off and the
better we'll grow.
That's the kind of economy
I want us to see again.
21:12:21
HOLT: Let me follow up with Mr.
Trump, if you can.
You've talked about creating 25
million jobs, and you've
promised to bring back millions
of jobs for Americans.
How are you going to bring back
the industries that have left
this country for cheaper labor
overseas?
How, specifically, are you going
to tell American manufacturers
that you have to come back?
TRUMP: Well, for one thing...
and before we start on that...
my father gave me a very
small loan in 1975, and I built
it into a company that's worth
many, many billions of
dollars, with some of the
greatest assets in the world,
and I say that only because
that's the kind of thinking
that our country needs.
Our country's in deep trouble.
We don't know what we're doing
when it comes to devaluations
and all of these countries
all over the world,
especially China.
They're the best, the
best ever at it.
What they're doing to us
is a very, very sad thing.
So we have to do that.
We have to renegotiate
our trade deals.
And, Lester, they're taking our
jobs, they're giving incentives,
they're doing things that,
frankly, we don't do.
Let me give you the
example of Mexico.
They have a VAT tax.
We're on a different system.
When we sell into
Mexico, there's a tax.
When they sell in... automatic,
16 percent, approximately.
When they sell into
us, there's no tax.
It's a defective agreement.
It's been defective for a long
time, many years, but the
politicians haven't done
anything
about it.
Now, in all fairness to
Secretary Clinton... yes, is
that OK?
Good.
I want you to be very happy.
It's very important to me.
But in all fairness to Secretary
Clinton, when she started
talking about this, it was
really very recently.
She's been doing
this for 30 years.
And why hasn't she made
the agreements better?
The NAFTA agreement
is defective.
Just because of the tax and many
other reasons, but just because
of the fact...
HOLT: Let me interrupt
just a moment, but...
TRUMP: Secretary Clinton and
others, politicians, should have
been doing this for years, not
right now, because of the fact
that we've created a movement.
They should have been
doing this for years.
What's happened to our jobs and
our country and our economy
generally is... look, we owe
$20 trillion.
We cannot do it any
longer, Lester.
HOLT: 21:14:28 Back to
the question, though.
How do you bring back...
specifically bring back jobs,
American manufacturers?
How do you make them
bring the jobs back?
TRUMP: Well, the first thing you
do is don't let the jobs leave.
The companies are leaving.
I could name, I mean, there
are thousands of them.
They're leaving, and they're
leaving in bigger numbers than
ever.
And what you do is you say,
fine, you want to go to Mexico
or some other country, good
luck.
We wish you a lot of luck.
But if you think you're going to
make your air conditioners or
your cars or your cookies
or whatever you make and bring
them into our country without a
tax, you're wrong.
And once you say you're going to
have to tax them coming in, and
our politicians never
do this, because they have
special interests and the
special interests want those
companies
to leave, because in many
cases, they own the companies.
So what I'm saying is, we
can stop them from leaving.
We have to stop
them from leaving.
And that's a big, big factor.
HOLT: Let me let Secretary
Clinton get in here.
CLINTON: 21:15:19 Well, let's
stop for a second and remember
where we were eight years ago.
We had the worst financial
crisis, the Great Recession, the
worst since the 1930s.
That was in large part because
of tax policies that slashed
taxes on the wealthy, failed
to invest in the middle class,
took their eyes off of Wall
Street, and created a perfect
storm.
In fact, Donald was one of the
people who rooted for the
housing crisis.
He said, back in 2006, "Gee, I
hope it does collapse, because
then I can go in and buy
some and make some money."
Well, it did collapse.
TRUMP: 21:16:02 That's
called business, by the way.
CLINTON: Nine million people...
nine million people lost their
jobs.
Five million people
lost their homes.
And $13 trillion in family
wealth was wiped out.
Now, we have come
back from that abyss.
And it has not been easy.
So we're now on the precipice of
having a potentially much better
economy, but the last
thing we need to do is to go
back to the policies that failed
us in the first place.
Independent experts have looked
at what I've proposed and looked
at what Donald's proposed,
and basically they've said this,
that if his tax plan, which
would blow up the debt by
over $5 trillion and would in
some instances disadvantage
middle-class families compared
to the wealthy, were to go into
effect, we would lose 3.5
million jobs and maybe have
another recession.
They've looked at my plans and
they've said, OK, if we can do
this, and I intend to get
it done, we will have 10 million
more new jobs, because we will
be making investments
where we can grow the economy.
Take clean energy.
Some country is going to be the
clean-energy superpower of the
21st century.
Donald thinks that climate
change is a hoax perpetrated by
the Chinese.
I think it's real.
TRUMP: I did not.
I did not.
I do not say that.
CLINTON: I think
science is real.
TRUMP: I do not say that.
CLINTON: And I think it's
important that we grip this and
deal with it, both at home and
abroad.
And here's what we can do.
We can deploy a half a
billion more solar panels.
We can have enough clean
energy to power every home.
We can build a new
modern electric grid.
That's a lot of jobs; that's a
lot of new economic activity.
So I've tried to be very
specific about what we can and
should do, and I am determined
that we're going to get the
economy really moving again,
building on the progress we've
made over the last eight years,
but never going back to what got
us in trouble in the
first place.
HOLT: Mr. Trump?
TRUMP: She talks
about solar panels.
We invested in a solar
company, our country.
That was a disaster.
They lost plenty of
money on that one.
Now, look, I'm a great believer
in all forms of energy, but
we're putting a lot of people
out of work.
Our energy policies
are a disaster.
Our country is losing so much in
terms of energy, in terms of
paying off our debt.
You can't do what you're looking
to do with $20 trillion in debt.
The Obama administration, from
the time they've come in, is
over 230 years' worth of debt,
and he's topped it.
He's doubled it in a course of
almost eight years,
seven-and-a-half years, to be
semi-
exact.
So I will tell you this.
We have to do a much better
job at keeping our jobs.
And we have to do a much better
job at giving companies
incentives to build new
companies
or to expand, because
they're not doing it.
21:18:59 And all you have to do
is look at Michigan and look at
Ohio and look at all
of these places where so many of
their jobs and their companies
are just leaving, they're
gone.
And, Hillary, I'd
just ask you this.
You've been doing
this for 30 years.
Why are you just thinking about
these solutions right now?
For 30 years, you've been doing
it, and now you're just starting
to think of solutions.
CLINTON: Well, actually...
TRUMP: I will
bring... excuse me.
I will bring back jobs.
You can't bring back jobs.
CLINTON: Well, actually, I have
thought about this quite a bit.
TRUMP: Yeah, for 30 years.
CLINTON: And I have...
Well, not quite that long.
I think my husband did a
pretty good job in the 1990s.
I think a lot about what worked
and how we can make it work
again...
TRUMP: Well, he
approved NAFTA...
(CROSSTALK)
CLINTON: million new
jobs, a balanced budget...
TRUMP: He approved NAFTA, which
is the single worst trade deal
ever approved in this country.
CLINTON: Incomes went
up for everybody.
Manufacturing jobs went up also
in the 1990s, if we're actually
going to look at the facts.
When I was in the Senate, I had
a number of trade deals that
came before me, and I held
them all to the same test.
Will they create
jobs in America?
Will they raise
incomes in America?
And are they good for
our national security?
Some of them I voted for.
The biggest one, a multinational
one known as CAFTA, I voted
against.
And because I hold the same
standards as I look at all of
these trade deals.
But let's not assume that trade
is the only challenge we have in
the economy.
I think it is a part of it, and
I've said what I'm going to do.
I'm going to have a
special prosecutor.
We're going to enforce the trade
deals we have, and we're going
to hold people accountable.
When I was secretary of state,
we actually increased American
exports globally 30 percent.
We increased them to
China 50 percent.
So I know how to really work to
get new jobs and to get exports
that helped to create more
new jobs.
HOLT: Very quickly...
TRUMP: But you haven't done it
in 30 years or 26 years or any
number you want to...
CLINTON: Well, I've been
a senator, Donald...
TRUMP: You haven't done it.
You haven't done it.
CLINTON: And I have been
a secretary of state...
TRUMP: Excuse me.
CLINTON: And I
have done a lot...
TRUMP: Your husband signed
NAFTA, which was one of the
worst things that ever happened
to the manufacturing industry.
CLINTON: Well,
that's your opinion.
That is your opinion.
TRUMP: You go to New England,
you go to Ohio, Pennsylvania,
you go anywhere you want,
Secretary
Clinton, and you will see
devastation where manufacture is
down 30, 40, sometimes 50
percent.
NAFTA is the worst trade deal
maybe ever signed anywhere, but
certainly ever signed in this
country.
And now you want to approve
Trans-Pacific Partnership.
You were totally in favor of it.
Then you heard what I was
saying, how bad it is, and you
said, I can't win that debate.
But you know that if you did
win, you would approve that, and
that will be almost as bad
as NAFTA.
Nothing will ever top NAFTA.
CLINTON: Well, that
is just not accurate.
I was against it once it was
finally negotiated and the terms
were laid out.
I wrote about that in...
TRUMP: You called it
the gold standard.
(CROSSTALK)
TRUMP: You called it the gold
standard of trade deals.
You said it's the finest
deal you've ever seen.
CLINTON: No.
TRUMP: And then you heard what I
said about it, and all of a
sudden you were against it.
CLINTON: Well, Donald, I know
you live in your own reality,
but that is not the facts.
The facts are... I did say I
hoped it would be a good deal,
but when it was negotiated...
TRUMP: Not.
CLINTON: which I was not
responsible for, I concluded it
wasn't.
I wrote about that in my book...
TRUMP: So is it President
Obama's fault?
CLINTON: before you
even announced.
TRUMP: Is it President
Obama's fault?
CLINTON: Look, there
are differences...
TRUMP: Secretary, is it
President Obama's fault?
CLINTON: There are...
TRUMP: Because he's pushing it.
CLINTON: There are different
views about what's good for our
country, our economy, and our
leadership in the world.
And I think it's important to
look at what we need to do to
get the economy going again.
That's why I said new jobs with
rising incomes, investments, not
in more tax cuts that would
add $5 trillion to the debt.
TRUMP: But you have no plan.
CLINTON: But in... oh, but I do.
TRUMP: Secretary,
you have no plan.
CLINTON: In fact, I have
written a book about it.
It's called "Stronger Together."
You can pick it up
tomorrow at a bookstore...
TRUMP: That's about
all you've...
(CROSSTALK)
HOLT: Folks, we're going to...
CLINTON: or at an
airport near you.
HOLT: We're going to move to...
CLINTON: But it's because I see
this... we need to have strong
growth, fair growth, sustained
growth.
We also have to look at how we
help families balance the
responsibilities at home and the
responsibilities at business.
So we have a very
robust set of plans.
And people have looked at both
of our plans, have concluded
that mine would create 10
million
jobs and yours would lose us 3.5
million jobs, and explode the
debt which would have a
recession.
TRUMP: You are going to approve
one of the biggest tax cuts in
history.
21:23:20 You are going to
approve one of the biggest tax
increases in history.
You are going to
drive business out.
Your regulations are a disaster,
and you're going to increase
regulations all over the
place.
And by the way, my tax cut is
the biggest since Ronald Reagan.
I'm very proud of it.
It will create tremendous
numbers of new jobs.
But regulations, you are going
to regulate these businesses out
of existence.
When I go around... Lester, I
tell you this, I've been all
over.
And when I go around, despite
the tax cut, the thing... the
things that business as in
people like the most is the fact
that I'm cutting regulation.
You have regulations on top of
regulations, and new companies
cannot form and old companies
are going out of business.
And you want to increase the
regulations and make them even
worse.
I'm going to cut regulations.
I'm going to cut taxes big
league, and you're going to
raise taxes big league, end of
story.
HOLT: Let me get you to pause
right there, because we're going
to move into... we're
going to move into
the next segment.
We're going to talk taxes...
CLINTON: That can't... that
can't be left to stand.
HOLT: Please just take 30
seconds and then we're going to
go on.
CLINTON: I kind of assumed that
there would be a lot of these
charges and claims, and
so...
TRUMP: Facts.
CLINTON: So we have taken the
home page of my website,
HillaryClinton.com, and we've
turned it into a fact-checker.
So if you want to see in
real-time what the facts are,
please go and take a look.
Because what I have proposed...
TRUMP: And take a look at
mine, also, and you'll see.
CLINTON: would not add a penny
to the debt, and your plans
would add $5 trillion
to the debt.
What I have proposed would cut
regulations and streamline them
for small businesses.
What I have proposed would be
paid for by raising taxes on the
wealthy, because they
have made all the
gains in the economy.
And I think it's time that the
wealthy and corporations paid
their fair share to support
this country.
HOLT: Well, you just
opened the next segment.
TRUMP: Well, could I just
finish... I think I...
(CROSSTALK)
HOLT: I'm going to give you
a chance right here...
TRUMP: I think I should... you
go to her website, and you take
a look at her website.
HOLT: with a new
15-minute segment...
TRUMP: She's going to raise
taxes $1.3 trillion.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, I'm going to...
TRUMP: And look at her website.
You know what?
It's no difference than this.
She's telling us
how to fight ISIS.
Just go to her website.
She tells you how to fight
ISIS on her website.
I don't think General Douglas
MacArthur would like that too
much.
HOLT: The next segment,
we're continuing...
CLINTON: Well, at least I
have a plan to fight ISIS.
HOLT: achieving prosperity...
TRUMP: No, no, you're telling
the enemy everything you want to
do.
CLINTON: No, we're not.
No, we're not.
TRUMP: See, you're telling the
enemy everything you want to do.
No wonder you've been
fighting... no wonder you've
been fighting ISIS your entire
adult
life.
CLINTON: That's a... that's...
go to the please, fact checkers,
get to work.
HOLT: OK, you are
unpacking a lot here.
And we're still on the issue
of achieving prosperity.
And I want to talk about taxes.
The fundamental difference
between the two of you concerns
the wealthy.
Secretary Clinton, you're
calling for a tax increase on
the wealthiest Americans.
I'd like you to
further defend that.
And, Mr. Trump, you're calling
for tax cuts for the wealthy.
I'd like you to defend that.
And this next two-minute
answer goes to you, Mr. Trump.
TRUMP: Well, I'm really calling
for major jobs, because the
wealthy are going create
tremendous jobs.
They're going to expand
their companies.
They're going to do
a tremendous job.
I'm getting rid of the
carried interest provision.
And if you really look, it's not
a tax... it's really not a great
thing for the wealthy.
It's a great thing for
the middle class.
companies to expand.
And when these people are going
to put billions and billions of
dollars into companies, and
when they're going to bring $2.5
trillion back from overseas,
where they can't bring
the money back, because
politicians like Secretary
Clinton won't allow them to
bring the money
back, because the taxes are so
onerous, and the bureaucratic
red tape, so what... is so
bad.
So what they're doing is they're
leaving our country, and
they're, believe it or not,
leaving
because taxes are too high and
because some of them have lots
of money outside of our
country.
And instead of bringing it back
and putting the money to work,
because they can't work
out a deal to... and everybody
agrees it should be brought
back.
Instead of that, they're leaving
our country to get their money,
because they can't bring
their money back into our
country, because of bureaucratic
red tape, because they can't
get together.
Because we have... we have a
president that can't sit them
around a table and get them
to approve something.
And here's the thing.
Republicans and Democrats agree
that this should be done, $2.5
trillion.
I happen to think
it's double that.
It's probably $5 trillion that
we can't bring into our country,
Lester.
And with a little leadership,
you'd get it in here very
quickly, and it could be put
to use on the inner cities and
lots of other things, and it
would be beautiful.
But we have no leadership.
And honestly, that starts
with Secretary Clinton.
21:28:01
HOLT: All right.
You have two minutes of the same
question to defend tax increases
on the wealthiest
Americans, Secretary Clinton.
CLINTON: I have a feeling that
by, the end of this evening, I'm
going to be blamed for
everything that's ever happened.
TRUMP: Why not?
CLINTON: Why not?
Yeah, why not?
(LAUGHTER)
You know, just join the debate
by saying more crazy things.
Now, let me say this, it
is absolutely the case...
TRUMP: There's nothing crazy
about not letting our companies
bring their money back into
their country.
HOLT: This is... this is
Secretary Clinton's two minutes,
please.
TRUMP: Yes.
CLINTON: Yeah, well, let's
start the clock again, Lester.
We've looked at
your tax proposals.
I don't see changes in the
corporate tax rates or the kinds
of proposals you're referring
to that would cause the
repatriation, bringing back of
money that's stranded overseas.
I happen to support that.
TRUMP: Then you didn't read it.
CLINTON: I happen to... I happen
to support that in a way that
will actually work to our
benefit.
But when I look at what you have
proposed, you have what is
called now the 21:29:01 Trump
loophole, because it would so
advantage you and the business
you do.
You've proposed an
approach that has a...
TRUMP: Who gave it that name?
The first I've... who
gave it that name?
(CROSSTALK)
HOLT: Mr. Trump, this is
Secretary Clinton's two minutes.
CLINTON: $4 billion tax
benefit for your family.
And when you look at what
you are proposing...
TRUMP: How much?
How much for my family?
CLINTON: it is...
TRUMP: Lester, how much?
CLINTON: as I said,
trumped-up trickle-down.
Trickle-down did not work.
It got us into the mess we
were in, in 2008 and 2009.
Slashing taxes on the
wealthy hasn't worked.
And a lot of really smart,
wealthy people know that.
And they are saying, hey, we
need to do more to make the
contributions we should be
making
to rebuild the middle class.
CLINTON: I don't think
top-down works in America.
I think building the middle
class, investing in the middle
class, making college debt-free
so more young people can get
their education, helping people
refinance their... their debt
from college at a lower rate.
Those are the kinds of things
that will really boost the
economy.
Broad-based, inclusive growth is
what we need in America, not
more advantages for people
at the very top.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, we're...
TRUMP: Typical politician.
All talk, no action.
Sounds good, doesn't work.
Never going to happen.
Our country is suffering because
people like Secretary Clinton
have made such bad decisions
in terms of our jobs and in
terms of what's going on.
Now, look, we have the worst
revival of an economy since the
Great Depression.
And believe me: We're
in a bubble right now.
And the only thing that looks
good is the stock market, but if
you raise interest rates
even a little bit, that's
going to come crashing down.
We are in a big,
fat, ugly bubble.
And we better be
awfully careful.
And we have a Fed that's
doing political things.
This Janet Yellen of the Fed.
The Fed is doing political... by
keeping the interest rates at
this level.
And believe me: The day Obama
goes off, and he leaves, and
goes out to the golf course
for the rest of his life to play
golf 21:31:00, when they raise
interest rates, you're going
to see some very bad things
happen, because the Fed is not
doing their job.
The Fed is being more political
than Secretary Clinton.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, we're talking
about the burden that Americans
have to pay, yet you have not
released your tax returns.
And the reason nominees have
released their returns for
decades is so that voters will
know if their potential
president owes money to who he
owes it to and any business
conflicts.
Don't Americans have a right to
know if there are any conflicts
of interest?
TRUMP: I don't mind releasing
I'm under a routine audit.
And it'll be released.
And... as soon as the audit's
finished, it will be released.
But you will learn more about
Donald Trump by going down to
the federal elections, where
I filed a 104-page essentially
financial statement of sorts,
the forms that they have.
It shows income... in fact, the
income... I just looked today...
the income is filed at
$694 million for this
past year, $694 million.
If you would have told me I was
going to make that 15 or 20
years ago, I would have been
very surprised.
But that's the kind of thinking
that our country needs.
When we have a country that's
doing so badly, that's being
ripped off by every single
country
in the world, it's the kind of
thinking that our country needs,
because everybody... Lester,
we have a trade deficit with all
of the countries that we do
business with, of almost $800
billion
a year.
You know what that is?
That means, who's negotiating
these trade deals?
We have people that are
political hacks negotiating our
trade deals.
HOLT: The IRS says an audit...
TRUMP: Excuse me.
HOLT: of your taxes... you're
perfectly free to release your
taxes during an audit.
And so the question, does the
public's right to know outweigh
your personal...
TRUMP: Well, I told you, I will
release them as soon as the
audit.
Look, I've been under audit
almost for 15 years.
21:33:00 I know a lot of wealthy
people that have never been
audited.
I said, do you get audited?
I get audited almost every year.
And in a way, I should
be complaining.
I'm not even complaining.
I don't mind it.
It's almost become
a way of life.
I get audited by the IRS.
But other people don't.
I will say this.
We have a situation in this
country that has to be taken
care of.
I will release my tax returns...
against my lawyer's wishes...
when she releases her 33,000
e-mails that have been deleted.
As soon as she releases
them, I will release.
(APPLAUSE)
I will release my tax returns.
And that's against... my
lawyers, they say, "Don't do
it."
I will tell you this.
No... in fact, watching shows,
they're reading the papers.
Almost every lawyer says, you
don't release your returns until
the audit's complete.
When the audit's
complete, I'll do it.
But I would go against them
if she releases her e-mails.
HOLT: So it's negotiable?
TRUMP: It's not negotiable, no.
Let her release the e-mails.
Why did she delete 33,000...
HOLT: Well, I'll let
her answer that.
But let me just admonish the
audience one more time.
There was an agreement.
We did ask you to be silent,
so it would be helpful for us.
Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: Well, I think you've
seen another example of
bait-and-switch here.
For 40 years, everyone running
for president has released their
tax returns.
You can go and see nearly, I
think, 39, 40 years of our tax
returns, but everyone has
done it.
We know the IRS has made clear
there is no prohibition on
releasing it when you're under
audit.
So you've got to ask yourself,
why won't he release his tax
returns?
And I think there may
be a couple of reasons.
First, maybe he's not as
rich as he says he is.
Second, maybe he's not as
charitable as he claims to be.
CLINTON: Third, we don't know
all of his business dealings,
but we have been told through
investigative
reporting that he owes about
$650 million to Wall Street and
foreign banks.
Or maybe he doesn't want the
American people, all of you
watching tonight, to know that
he's paid nothing in federal
taxes, because the only years
that anybody's ever seen were
a couple of years when he had to
turn them over to state
authorities when he was trying
to get a casino license, and
they showed he didn't pay any
federal income tax.
21:35:27 TRUMP: That
makes me smart.
CLINTON: So if he's paid zero,
that means zero for troops, zero
for vets, zero for schools
or health.
And I think probably he's not
all that enthusiastic about
having the rest of our country
see what
the real reasons are, because it
must be something really
important, even terrible, that
he's
trying to hide.
And the financial disclosure
statements, they don't give you
the tax rate.
They don't give you all the
details that tax returns would.
And it just seems to me that
this is something that the
American people deserve to see.
And I have no reason to believe
that he's ever going to release
his tax returns, because
there's something he's hiding.
And we'll guess.
We'll keep guessing at what
it might be that he's hiding.
But I think the question is,
were he ever to get near the
White House, what would be
those conflicts?
Who does he owe money to?
Well, he owes you the answers to
that, and he should provide
them.
HOLT: He also... he also raised
the issue of your e-mails.
Do you want to respond to that?
CLINTON: I do.
You know, I made a mistake
using a private e-mail.
TRUMP: That's for sure.
CLINTON: And if I had to do it
over again, I would, obviously,
do it differently.
But I'm not going to
make any excuses.
It was a mistake, and I take
responsibility for that.
HOLT: Mr. Trump?
TRUMP: That was more
than a mistake.
That was done purposely.
OK?
That was not a mistake.
That was done purposely.
When you have your staff taking
the Fifth Amendment, taking the
Fifth so they're not
prosecuted, when you have the
man that set up the illegal
server taking the Fifth, I
think it's disgraceful.
And believe me, this country
thinks it's really thinks it's
disgraceful, also.
As far as my tax returns, you
don't learn that much from tax
returns.
That I can tell you.
You learn a lot from
financial disclosure.
And you should go down
and take a look at that.
The other thing, I'm
extremely underleveraged.
The report that said $650...
which, by the way, a lot of
friends of mine that know my
business say, boy, that's
really not a lot of money.
It's not a lot of money
relative to what I had.
The buildings that were in
question, they said in the same
report, which was... actually,
it wasn't even a bad story, to
be honest with you, but the
buildings are worth $3.9
billion.
And the $650 isn't even on that.
But it's not $650.
It's much less than that.
But I could give you a list of
banks, I would if that would
help you, I would give you
a list of banks.
These are very fine
institutions, very fine banks.
I could do that very quickly.
I am very underleveraged.
I have a great company.
I have a tremendous income.
And the reason I say that is
not in a braggadocios way.
It's because it's about time
that this country had somebody
running it that has an idea
about
money.
When we have $20 trillion in
debt, and our country's a mess,
you know, it's one thing
to have $20 trillion in debt and
our roads are good and our
bridges are good and
everything's
in great shape, our airports.
21:38:25 Our airports are like
from a third world country.
You land at LaGuardia, you land
at Kennedy, you land at LAX, you
land at Newark, and you
come in from Dubai and Qatar and
you see these incredible... you
come in from China, you
see these incredible airports,
and you land we've become a
third world country.
So the worst of all
things has happened.
We owe $20 trillion,
and we're a mess.
We haven't even started.
And we've spent $6 trillion in
the Middle East, according to a
report that I just saw.
Whether it's 6 or 5, but it
looks like it's 6, $6 trillion
in the Middle East, we could
have rebuilt our country twice.
And it's really a shame.
And it's politicians like
Secretary Clinton that have
caused this problem.
Our country has
tremendous problems.
We're a debtor nation.
We're a serious debtor nation.
And we have a country that needs
new roads, new tunnels, new
bridges, new airports, new
schools, new hospitals.
And we don't have the money,
because it's been squandered on
so many of your ideas.
HOLT: We'll let you respond and
we'll move on to the next
segment.
CLINTON: And maybe because you
haven't paid any federal income
tax for a lot of years.
(APPLAUSE)
And the other thing I
think is important...
TRUMP: It would be
squandered, too, believe me.
CLINTON: is if your... if your
main claim to be president of
the United States is your
business, then I think we
should talk about that.
You know, your campaign manager
said that you built a lot of
businesses on the backs
of little guys.
And, indeed, I have met a lot of
the people who were stiffed by
you and your businesses,
Donald.
I've met dishwashers, painters,
architects, glass installers,
marble installers, drapery
installers, like my dad was, who
you refused to pay when they
finished the work that you
asked them to do.
We have an architect in the
audience who designed one of
your clubhouses at one of your
golf
courses.
It's a beautiful facility.
It immediately was put to use.
And you wouldn't pay what the
man needed to be paid, what he
was charging you to do...
TRUMP: Maybe he didn't do a good
job and I was unsatisfied with
his work...
CLINTON: Well, to...
TRUMP: Which our country
should do, too.
CLINTON: Do the thousands of
people that you have stiffed
over the course of your business
not deserve some kind of apology
from someone who has taken their
labor, taken the goods
that they produced, and
then refused to pay them?
21:40 I can only say that I'm
certainly relieved that my late
father never did business with
you.
He provided a good middle-class
life for us, but the people he
worked for, he expected
the bargain to be
kept on both sides.
And when we talk about your
business, you've taken business
bankruptcy six times.
There are a lot of great
businesspeople that have never
taken bankruptcy once.
You call yourself
the King of Debt.
You talk about leverage.
You even at one time suggested
that you would try to negotiate
down the national debt of
the United States.
TRUMP: Wrong.
Wrong.
CLINTON: Well, sometimes there's
not a direct transfer of skills
from business to government,
but sometimes what happened in
business would be really bad for
government.
HOLT: Let's let Mr. Trump...
CLINTON: And we need to
be very clear about that.
TRUMP: So, yeah, I think
I do think it's time.
Look, it's all words,
it's all sound bites.
I built an unbelievable company.
Some of the greatest assets
anywhere in the world, real
estate assets anywhere in the
world, beyond the United States,
in Europe, lots of different
places.
It's an unbelievable company.
But on occasion, four times, we
used certain laws that are
there.
And when Secretary Clinton talks
about people that didn't get
paid, first of all, they did
get paid a lot, but taken
advantage of the laws of the
nation.
Now, if you want to change the
laws, you've been there a long
time, change the laws.
But I take advantage of the laws
of the nation because I'm
running a company.
My obligation right now is to do
well for myself, my family, my
employees, for my companies.
And that's what I do.
But what she doesn't say is that
tens of thousands of people that
are unbelievably happy and
that love me.
I'll give you an example.
We're just opening up on
Pennsylvania Avenue right next
to the White House, so if I
don't
get there one way, I'm going to
get to Pennsylvania Avenue
another.
But we're opening the
Old Post Office.
Under budget, ahead of schedule,
saved tremendous money.
I'm a year ahead of schedule.
And that's what this
country should be doing.
We build roads and they cost two
and three and four times what
they're supposed to cost.
We buy products for our military
and they come in at costs that
are so far above what
they were supposed to be,
because we don't have people
that know what they're doing.
When we look at the budget, the
budget is bad to a large extent
because we have people
that have no idea as to
what to do and how to buy.
The Trump International is way
under budget and way ahead of
schedule.
And we should be able to
do that for our country.
HOLT: Well, we're well behind
schedule, so I want to move to
our next segment.
We move into our next segment
talking about America's
direction.
And let's start by
talking about race.
The share of Americans who say
race relations are bad in this
country is the highest it's
been in decades, much of it
amplified by shootings of
African-Americans by police, as
we've seen
recently in Charlotte and Tulsa.
Race has been a big issue in
this campaign, and one of you is
going to have to bridge
a very wide and bitter gap.
So how do you heal the divide?
Secretary Clinton, you
get two minutes on this.
CLINTON: Well, you're right.
Race remains a significant
challenge in our country.
Unfortunately, race still
determines too much, often
determines where people live,
determines
what kind of education in their
public schools they can get,
and, yes, it determines how
they're treated in the
criminal justice system.
We've just seen those two tragic
examples in both Tulsa and
Charlotte.
And we've got to do several
things at the same time.
We have to restore trust between
communities and the police.
We have to work to make sure
that our police are using the
best training, the best
techniques,
that they're well prepared to
use force only when necessary.
Everyone should be respected by
the law, and everyone should
respect the law.
CLINTON: Right now, that's not
the case in a lot of our
neighborhoods.
So I have, ever since the first
day of my campaign, called for
criminal justice reform.
I've laid out a platform that I
think would begin to remedy some
of the problems we have
in the criminal justice system.
But we also have to recognize,
in addition to the challenges
that we face with policing,
21:45:35 there are so many good,
brave police officers who
equally want reform.
So we have to bring communities
together in order to begin
working on that as a mutual
goal.
And we've got to get guns out of
the hands of people who should
not have them.
The gun epidemic is the leading
cause of death of young
African-American men, more than
the next nine causes
put together.
So we have to do two
things, as I said.
We have to restore trust.
We have to work with the police.
We have to make sure they
respect the communities and the
communities respect them.
And we have to tackle the plague
of gun violence, which is a big
contributor to a lot of the
problems that we're
seeing today.
HOLT: All right, Mr. Trump,
you have two minutes.
How do you heal the divide?
TRUMP: Well, first of all,
Secretary Clinton doesn't want
to use a couple of words, and
that's law and order.
And we need law and order.
If we don't have it, we're
not going to have a country.
And when I look at what's going
on in Charlotte, a city I love,
a city where I have investments,
when I look at what's going on
throughout various parts of our
country, whether it's
I mean, I can just keep naming
them all day long... we need law
and order in our country.
I just got today the, as you
know, the endorsement of the
Fraternal Order of Police, we
just
just came in.
We have endorsements from, I
think, almost every police
group, very... I mean, a large
percentage of them in
the United States.
We have a situation where we
have our inner cities,
African-Americans, Hispanics are
living in he'll because
it's so dangerous.
You walk down the
street, you get shot.
21:47:17 In Chicago, they've had
thousands of shootings,
thousands since January 1st.
Thousands of shootings.
And I'm saying, where is this?
Is this a war-torn country?
What are we doing?
And we have to
stop the violence.
We have to bring
back law and order.
In a place like Chicago, where
thousands of people have been
killed, thousands over the
last number of years, in fact,
almost 4,000 have been killed
since Barack Obama became
president, over... almost 4,000
people in Chicago have been
killed.
We have to bring
back law and order.
Now, whether or not in a place
like Chicago you do stop and
frisk, which worked very well,
Mayor Giuliani is here,
worked very well in New York.
It brought the crime
rate way down.
But you take the gun away from
criminals that shouldn't be
having it.
We have gangs
roaming the street.
And in many cases, they're
illegally here, illegal
immigrants.
And they have guns.
And they shoot people.
And we have to be very strong.
And we have to be very vigilant.
We have to be... we have
to know what we're doing.
Right now, our police, in many
cases, are afraid to do
anything.
We have to protect our inner
cities, because African-American
communities are being decimated
by crime, decimated.
HOLT: Your two... your two
minutes expired, but I do want
to follow up.
21:48:38 Stop-and-frisk was
ruled unconstitutional in New
York, because it largely singled
out
black and Hispanic young men.
TRUMP: No, you're wrong.
It went before a judge, who was
a very against-police judge.
It was taken away from her.
And our mayor, our new mayor,
refused to go forward with the
case.
They would have won an appeal.
If you look at it, throughout
the country, there are many
places where it's allowed.
HOLT: The argument is that it's
a form of racial profiling.
TRUMP: No, the argument is that
we have to take the guns away
from these people that
have them and they are bad
people that shouldn't have them.
These are felons.
These are people that are bad
people that shouldn't be...
21:49:18 when you have 3,000
shootings in Chicago from
January 1st, when you have 4,000
people killed in Chicago by
guns, from the beginning of the
presidency of Barack Obama, his
hometown, you have to
have stop-and-frisk.
You need more police.
You need a better community,
you know, relation.
You don't have good community
relations in Chicago.
It's terrible.
I have property there.
It's terrible what's
going on in Chicago.
But when you look... and
Chicago's not the only... you go
to Ferguson, you go to so many
different places.
You need better relationships.
I agree with Secretary
Clinton on this.
TRUMP: You need better
relationships between the
communities and the police,
because in
some cases, it's not good.
But you look at Dallas, where
the relationships were really
studied, the relationships were
really a beautiful thing, and
then five police officers were
killed one night very violently.
So there's some bad
things going on.
Some really bad things.
HOLT: Secretary Clinton...
TRUMP: But we need... Lester,
we need law and order.
And we need law and order in the
inner cities, because the people
that are most affected
by what's happening are
African-American and Hispanic
people.
And it's very unfair to them
what our politicians are
allowing to happen.
HOLT: Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: 21:50:36 Well, I've
heard... I've heard Donald say
this at his rallies, and
it's really unfortunate that he
paints such a dire negative
picture of black communities
in our country.
TRUMP: Ugh.
CLINTON: You know, the vibrancy
of the black church, the black
businesses that employ so
many people, the opportunities
that so many families are
working to provide for their
kids.
There's a lot that we should be
proud of and we should be
supporting and lifting up.
But we do always have to make
sure we keep people safe.
There are the right ways of
doing it, and then there are
ways that are ineffective.
Stop-and-frisk was found to be
unconstitutional and, in part,
because it was ineffective.
It did not do what
it needed to do.
Now, I believe in
community policing.
And, in fact, violent crime is
one-half of what it was in 1991.
Property crime is
down 40 percent.
We just don't want to
see it creep back up.
We've had 25 years of
very good cooperation.
But there were some problems,
some unintended consequences.
Too many young African-American
and Latino men ended up in jail
for nonviolent offenses.
And it's just a fact that if
you're a young African-American
man and you do the same thing
as a young white man, you are
more likely to be arrested,
charged, convicted, and
incarcerated.
So we've got to address the
systemic racism in our criminal
justice system.
21:52:20 We cannot just
say law and order.
We have to say... we have to
come forward with a plan that is
going to divert people
from the criminal justice
system, deal with mandatory
minimum sentences, which have
put
too many people away for too
long for doing too little.
We need to have more
second chance programs.
I'm glad that we're ending
private prisons in the federal
system; I want to see them
ended in the state system.
You shouldn't have a profit
motivation to fill prison cells
with young Americans.
So there are some positive
ways we can work on this.
And I believe strongly that
commonsense gun safety measures
would assist us.
Right now... and this is
something Donald has supported,
along with the gun lobby...
right
now, we've got too many
military-style weapons on the
streets.
In a lot of places, our
police are outgunned.
We need comprehensive background
checks, and we need to keep guns
out of the hands of those
who will do harm.
And we finally need to pass a
prohibition on anyone who's on
the terrorist watch list
from being able to buy
a gun in our country.
21:53:39 If you're too dangerous
to fly, you are too dangerous to
buy a gun.
So there are things we can do,
and we ought to do it in a
bipartisan way.
HOLT: Secretary Clinton, last
week, you said we've got to do
everything possible to improve
policing, to go right
at implicit bias.
21:53:50 Do you believe that
police are implicitly biased
against black people?
CLINTON: Lester, I think
implicit bias is a problem for
everyone, not just police.
I think, unfortunately, too many
of us in our great country jump
to conclusions about
each other.
And therefore, I think we need
all of us to be asking hard
questions about, you know,
why am I feeling this way?
But when it comes to policing,
since it can have literally
fatal consequences, I have
said, in my first budget, we
would put money into that budget
to help us deal with implicit
bias by retraining a lot
of our police officers.
I've met with a group of very
distinguished, experienced
police chiefs a few weeks ago.
They admit it's an issue.
They've got a lot of concerns.
21:54:38 Mental health is one of
the biggest concerns, because
now police are having to
handle a lot of really difficult
mental health problems on the
street.
They want support, they want
more training, they want more
assistance.
And I think the federal
government could be in a
position where we would offer
and provide
that.
HOLT: Mr. Trump...
TRUMP: I'd like to
respond to that.
HOLT: Please.
TRUMP: First of all, I agree,
and a lot of people even within
my own party want to give
certain rights to people on
watch lists and no-fly lists.
I agree with you.
When a person is on a watch list
or a no-fly list, and I have the
endorsement of the NRA,
which I'm very proud of.
These are very, very good
people, and they're protecting
the Second Amendment.
But I think we have to look very
strongly at no-fly lists and
watch lists.
And when people are on there,
even if they shouldn't be on
there, we'll help them, we'll
help them legally, we'll
help them get off.
But I tend to agree with
that quite strongly.
I do want to bring up the fact
that you were the one that
brought up the words 21:55:33
super-predator about
young black youth.
And that's a term that I think
was a... it's it's been horribly
met, as you know.
I think you've
apologized for it.
But I think it was a
terrible thing to say.
And when it comes to
stop-and-frisk, you know, you're
talking about takes guns away.
Well, I'm talking about taking
guns away from gangs and people
that use them.
And I don't think... I really
don't think you disagree with me
on this, if you want
to know the truth.
I think maybe there's a
political reason why you can't
say it, but I really don't
believe
in New York City,
stop-and-frisk, we had 2,200
murders, and stop-and-frisk
brought
it down to 500 murders.
Five hundred murders
is a lot of murders.
It's hard to believe, 500 is
like supposed to be good?
But we went from 2,200 to 500.
And it was continued
on by Mayor Bloomberg.
And it was terminated
by current mayor.
But stop-and-frisk had a
tremendous impact on the safety
of New York City.
Tremendous beyond belief.
So when you say it has no
impact, it really did.
It had a very, very big impact.
CLINTON: Well, it's also fair to
say, if we're going to talk
about mayors, that under the
current mayor, crime has
continued to drop, including
murders.
So there is...
TRUMP: No, you're wrong.
You're wrong.
CLINTON: No, I'm not.
TRUMP: Murders are up.
All right.
You check it.
CLINTON: New York... New York
has done an excellent job.
And I give credit... I give
credit across the board going
back two mayors, two police
chiefs, because it has worked.
And other communities need to
come together to do what will
work, as well.
Look, one murder is too many.
But it is important that we
learn about what has been
effective.
And not go to things that sound
good that really did not have
the kind of impact that
we would want.
Who disagrees with keeping
neighborhoods safe?
But let's also add, 21:57:30 no
one should disagree about
respecting the rights of young
men who live in those
neighborhoods.
And so we need to do a better
job of working, again, with the
communities, faith communities,
business communities, as well as
the police to try to deal with
this problem.
HOLT: This conversation
is about race.
And so, Mr. Trump, I have
to ask you for five...
TRUMP: I'd like to just
respond, if I might.
HOLT: Please... 20 seconds.
TRUMP: I'd just like to respond.
HOLT: Please respond, then I've
got a quick follow-up for you.
TRUMP: I will.
Look, the African-American
community has been let down by
our politicians.
They talk good around election
time, like right now, and after
the election, they said,
see ya later, I'll see
you in four years.
The African-American
community... because... Look,
the community within the inner
cities
has been so badly treated.
They've been abused and used in
order to get votes by Democrat
politicians, because that's
what it is.
They've controlled these
communities for up to 100 years.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, let me...
(CROSSTALK)
CLINTON: Well,
I... I do think...
TRUMP: And I will tell you,
DONALD TRUMP: Nobody knows the
system better than me. I alone
can fix it.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I'm
going to close my campaign
focused on opportunities for
kids
and fairness for families.
DONALD TRUMP: Hillary failed on
the economy. Everything she
touched didn't work out,
nothing.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Even if
you're totally opposed to Donald
Trump, you may still have
some questions about me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Welcome to this "PBS NewsHour"
special coverage of the first
debate between the two
major-party
presidential candidates, Hillary
Clinton and Donald Trump.
The stage is set at Hofstra
University on Long Island, New
York. With the election 43
days away the race tightening, a
lot is on the line tonight,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It certainly is,
Gwen, and given that this is the
first time these two
have faced each
other one on one.
Lester Holt of NBC News
will be moderating.
Joining us at the table are our
regular contributors, syndicated
columnist Mark Shields, New York
Times columnist David Brooks,
and from The Cook Political
Report, Amy Walter.
We welcome all you have here
for the next two hours.
Amy, let's start with you.
What are you looking for?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Each of these candidates
has an enthusiasm gap
problem within their own party.
So, they have got to get their
partisans fired up.
For Hillary Clinton, it's young
people. For Donald Trump, he's
got to get those white
college-educated voters back
into the Republican fold, where
they have been. And then they
have got to get those voters,
both of them, who are torn,
don't like either choice they
have in front of
them, to pick them.
GWEN IFILL: Mark Shields, what
would you... surprise you the
most of what these candidates
might
or might not do tonight?
MARK SHIELDS: Does Donald Trump
dare to be boring? Does he come
out sedated/presidential?
And can Hillary Clinton, who is
a marvelous and superior
deliverer of information, make
an emotional connection
with American voters?
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, what are
you on the edge of your seat
looking for?
DAVID BROOKS: We have been
around each other too long. I
wrote down emotional connection.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: Did you?
DAVID BROOKS: This is
not a cognitive night.
This is not philosophy. This is
not grand strategy. It's moment
of intimacy, that unscripted
moment when the unconscious is
revealed that will be replayed
on YouTube over and over
and over again.
And so it's just, is he
commanding or is he cruel? Is
she relatable and does she seem
calmly smart? And it's whether
people get that vibe, the first
they vibe, that will
determine the night.
GWEN IFILL: Is this about what
they know or who they are?
AMY WALTER: Well, I think it's
mostly about who they are.
For voters at this stage of the
game, they are looking up on
that dais to see who they
can spend the next four years
with, who they want to invite
into their homes moment after
moment.
Many voters say, I don't want
either one of them in there.
GWEN IFILL: A lot of them.
AMY WALTER: A lot of
voters are saying that.
But this is the one maybe that
they're not going to like, but
they will feel comfortable
enough.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Mark, people
are going to be fact-checking
this debate. They're going
to be raising questions about
whether what either one of them
said was correct or not.
MARK SHIELDS: No,
you're right, Judy.
And if it's what they know,
it will be a short evening...
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: for the Republican
nominee, whose knowledge bank
has been overdrawn.
And I think it's about, more
than anything else, each case,
what does he know, his command
of it, is he comfortable with
it, and who she is. And I think
that is really the question.
DAVID BROOKS: And there
is the gender politics.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
Well, we're turning now to
Lester Holt of NBC News.
TRANSCRIPT START
HOLT: Good evening from Hofstra
University in Hempstead, New
York. I'm Lester Holt, anchor
of "NBC Nightly News." I want to
welcome you to the first
presidential debate.
The participants tonight are
Donald Trump and Hillary
Clinton. This debate is
sponsored
by the Commission on
Presidential Debates, a
nonpartisan, nonprofit
organization. The
commission drafted tonight's
format, and the rules have been
agreed to by the campaigns.
The 90-minute debate is divided
into six segments, each 15
minutes long. We'll explore
three
topic areas tonight: Achieving
prosperity; America's direction;
and securing America.
At the start of each segment, I
will ask the same lead-off
question to both candidates,
and they will each have up to
two minutes to respond. From
that point until the end
of the segment, we'll
have an open discussion.
The questions are mine and have
not been shared with the
commission or the campaigns. The
audience here in the room has
agreed to remain silent so that
we can focus on what the
candidates
are saying.
I will invite you to applaud,
however, at this moment, as we
welcome the candidates:
Democratic nominee for president
of the United States, Hillary
Clinton, and Republican nominee
for president of the United
States, Donald J. Trump.
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: How are you, Donald?
HOLT: Good luck to you.
(APPLAUSE)
Well, I don't expect us to cover
all the issues of this campaign
tonight, but I remind everyone,
there are two more presidential
debates scheduled. We are going
to focus on many of the issues
that voters tell us are most
important, and we're going to
press for specifics. I am
honored
to have this role, but this
evening belongs to the
candidates and, just as
important,
to the American people.
Candidates, we look forward to
hearing you articulate your
policies and your positions,
as well as your visions and
your values. So, let's begin.
We're calling this opening
segment "Achieving Prosperity."
And central to that is jobs.
There are two economic realities
in America today. There's been a
record six straight
years of job growth, and new
census numbers show incomes have
increased at a record rate
after years of stagnation.
However, income inequality
remains significant, and nearly
half of Americans are living
paycheck to paycheck.
Beginning with you, Secretary
Clinton, why are you a better
choice than your opponent
to create the kinds of jobs that
will put more money into the
pockets of American works?
CLINTON: Well, thank you,
Lester, and thanks to Hofstra
for hosting us.
The central question in this
election is really what kind of
country we want to be and what
kind of future we'll build
together. Today is my
granddaughter's second birthday,
so
I think about this a lot. First,
we have to build an economy that
works for everyone,
not just those at the top. That
means we need new jobs, good
jobs, with rising incomes.
I want us to invest in you. I
want us to invest in your
future. That means jobs in
infrastructure,
in advanced manufacturing,
innovation and technology,
clean, renewable energy, and
small
business, because most of the
new jobs will come from small
business. We also have to
make the economy fairer. That
starts with raising the national
minimum wage and also
guarantee, finally, equal
pay for women's work.
CLINTON: I also want to see more
companies do profit-sharing. If
you help create the
profits, you should be able to
share in them, not just the
executives at the top.
And I want us to do more to
support people who are
struggling to balance family and
work.
I've heard from so many of you
about the difficult choices you
face and the stresses that
you're
under. So let's have paid family
leave, earned sick days. Let's
be sure we have affordable
child care and
debt-free college.
How are we going to do it? We're
going to do it by having the
wealthy pay their fair
share and close the
corporate loopholes.
Finally, we tonight are on the
stage together, Donald Trump and
I. Donald, it's good to be
with you. We're going to have a
debate where we are talking
about the important issues
facing our country. You have to
judge us, who can shoulder the
immense, awesome
responsibilities
of the presidency, who can put
into action the plans that will
make your life better.
I hope that I will be able to
earn your vote on November 8th.
HOLT: Secretary
Clinton, thank you.
Mr. Trump, the same question to
you. It's about putting money...
more money into the
pockets of American workers.
You have up to two minutes.
TRUMP: 21:08:32 Thank you,
Lester. Our jobs are fleeing the
country. They're going to
Mexico. They're going to many
other countries. You look at
what China is doing to our
country
in terms of making our product.
They're devaluing their
currency, and there's nobody in
our
government to fight them. And we
have a very good fight. And we
have a winning fight. Because
they're using our country as a
piggy bank to rebuild China, and
many other countries
are doing the same thing.
So we're losing our good jobs,
so many of them. When you look
at what's happening in
Mexico, a friend of mine who
builds plants said it's the
eighth wonder of the world.
They're building some of the
biggest plants anywhere in the
world, some of the most
sophisticated,
some of the best plants. With
the United States, as he said,
not so much.
So Ford is leaving. You see
that, their small car division
leaving. Thousands of jobs
leaving
Michigan, leaving Ohio. They're
all leaving. And we can't allow
it to happen anymore. As
far as child care is concerned
and so many other things, I
think Hillary and I agree
on that. We probably disagree a
little bit as to numbers and
amounts and what we're going
to do, but perhaps we'll be
talking about that later.
But we have to stop our jobs
from being stolen from us. We
have to stop our companies from
leaving the United States and,
with it, firing all of their
people. All you have to do is
take a look at Carrier air
conditioning in Indianapolis.
They left... fired 1,400 people.
They're going to Mexico. So many
hundreds and hundreds of
companies are doing this.
TRUMP: We cannot let it happen.
Under my plan, I'll be reducing
taxes tremendously, from
35 percent to 15 percent for
companies, small and big
businesses. That's going to be a
job
creator like we haven't seen
since Ronald Reagan. It's going
to be a beautiful thing
to watch.
Companies will come. They will
build. They will expand. New
companies will start. And
I look very, very much forward
to doing it. We have to
renegotiate our trade deals, and
we have to stop these countries
from stealing our companies and
our jobs.
HOLT: Secretary Clinton,
would you like to respond?
CLINTON: Well, I think that
trade is an important issue. Of
course, we are 5 percent of the
world's population; we have to
trade with the other 95 percent.
And we need to have
smart, fair trade deals.
We also, though, need to have a
tax system that rewards work and
not just financial transactions.
And the kind of plan that Donald
has put forth would be
trickle-down economics all over
again.
In fact, it would be the most
extreme version, the biggest tax
cuts for the top percent of
the people in this country
than we've ever had.
I call it trumped-up
trickle-down, because that's
exactly what it would be. That
is not
how we grow the economy.
We just have a different view
about what's best for growing
the economy, how we make
investments that will actually
produce jobs and rising incomes.
I think we come at it from
somewhat different perspectives.
I understand that. You know,
Donald was very fortunate in his
life, and that's all to his
benefit. He started his
business with $14 million,
borrowed from his father, and he
really believes that the more
you help wealthy people, the
better off we'll be and that
everything will work out from
there.
I don't buy that. I have a
different experience. My father
was a small-businessman. He
worked
really hard. He printed drapery
fabrics on long tables, where he
pulled out those fabrics
and he went down with a
silkscreen and dumped the paint
in and took the squeegee and
kept
going.
And so what I believe is the
more we can do for the middle
class, the more we can invest
in you, your education, your
skills, your future, the better
we will be off and the
better we'll grow. That's the
kind of economy I want us to see
again. 21:12:21
HOLT: Let me follow up with Mr.
Trump, if you can. You've talked
about creating 25 million
jobs, and you've promised to
bring back millions of jobs for
Americans. How are you going to
bring back the industries that
have left this country for
cheaper labor overseas? How,
specifically,
are you going to tell American
manufacturers that you have to
come back?
TRUMP: Well, for one thing...
and before we start on that...
my father gave me a very
small loan in 1975, and I built
it into a company that's worth
many, many billions of
dollars, with some of the
greatest assets in the world,
and I say that only because
that's the kind of thinking
that our country needs.
Our country's in deep trouble.
We don't know what we're doing
when it comes to devaluations
and all of these countries all
over the world, especially
China. They're the best, the
best
ever at it. What they're doing
to us is a very, very sad thing.
So we have to do that. We have
to renegotiate our trade deals.
And, Lester, they're taking
our jobs, they're giving
incentives, they're doing things
that, frankly, we don't do.
Let me give you the example of
Mexico. They have a VAT tax.
We're on a different system.
When we sell into Mexico,
there's a tax. When they sell
in... automatic, 16 percent,
approximately.
When they sell into us, there's
no tax. It's a defective
agreement. It's been defective
for a long time, many years, but
the politicians haven't done
anything about it.
Now, in all fairness to
Secretary Clinton yes, is that
OK? Good. I want you to be
very happy. It's very
important to me.
But in all fairness to Secretary
Clinton, when she started
talking about this, it was
really very recently. She's been
doing this for 30 years. And why
hasn't she made the
agreements better? The NAFTA
agreement is defective. Just
because of the tax and many
other reasons, but just
because of the fact...
HOLT: Let me interrupt
just a moment, but...
TRUMP: Secretary Clinton and
others, politicians, should have
been doing this for years, not
right now, because of the fact
that we've created a movement.
They should have been
doing this for years. What's
happened to our jobs and our
country and our economy
generally
is... look, we owe $20 trillion.
We cannot do it any longer,
Lester.
HOLT: 21:14:28 Back to the
question, though. How do you
bring back... specifically bring
back jobs, American
manufacturers? How do you make
them bring the jobs back?
TRUMP: Well, the first thing you
do is don't let the jobs leave.
The companies are leaving.
I could name, I mean, there are
thousands of them. They're
leaving, and they're leaving
in bigger numbers than ever.
And what you do is you say,
fine, you want to go to Mexico
or some other country, good
luck. We wish you a lot of luck.
But if you think you're going to
make your air conditioners
or your cars or your cookies or
whatever you make and bring them
into our country without
a tax, you're wrong.
And once you say you're going to
have to tax them coming in, and
our politicians never
do this, because they have
special interests and the
special interests want those
companies
to leave, because in many cases,
they own the companies. So what
I'm saying is, we can
stop them from leaving. We have
to stop them from leaving. And
that's a big, big factor.
HOLT: Let me let Secretary
Clinton get in here.
CLINTON: 21:15:19 Well, let's
stop for a second and remember
where we were eight years ago.
We had the worst financial
crisis, the Great Recession, the
worst since the 1930s. That
was in large part because of tax
policies that slashed taxes on
the wealthy, failed
to invest in the middle class,
took their eyes off of Wall
Street, and created a perfect
storm.
In fact, Donald was one of the
people who rooted for the
housing crisis. He said, back
in 2006, "Gee, I hope it does
collapse, because then I can go
in and buy some and make some
money." Well, it did collapse.
TRUMP: 21:16:02 That's
called business, by the way.
CLINTON: Nine million people...
nine million people lost their
jobs. Five million people
lost their homes. And $13
trillion in family wealth was
wiped out.
Now, we have come back from that
abyss. And it has not been easy.
So we're now on the
precipice of having a
potentially much better economy,
but the last thing we need to do
is to go back to the policies
that failed us in the first
place.
Independent experts have looked
at what I've proposed and looked
at what Donald's proposed,
and basically they've said this,
that if his tax plan, which
would blow up the debt by
over $5 trillion and would in
some instances disadvantage
middle-class families compared
to the wealthy, were to go into
effect, we would lose 3.5
million jobs and maybe have
another recession.
They've looked at my plans and
they've said, OK, if we can do
this, and I intend to get
it done, we will have 10 million
more new jobs, because we will
be making investments
where we can grow the economy.
Take clean energy. Some country
is going to be the clean-
energy superpower of the 21st
century. Donald thinks that
climate change is a hoax
perpetrated
by the Chinese. I
think it's real.
TRUMP: I did not. I did not.
I do not say that.
CLINTON: I think
science is real.
TRUMP: I do not say that.
CLINTON: And I think it's
important that we grip this and
deal with it, both at home and
abroad. And here's what we can
do. We can deploy a half a
billion more solar panels.
We can have enough clean energy
to power every home. We can
build a new modern electric
grid.
That's a lot of jobs; that's a
lot of new economic activity.
So I've tried to be very
specific about what we can and
should do, and I am determined
that we're going to get the
economy really moving again,
building on the progress we've
made over the last eight years,
but never going back to what got
us in trouble in the
first place.
HOLT: Mr. Trump?
TRUMP: She talks about solar
panels. We invested in a solar
company, our country. That was
a disaster. They lost plenty
of money on that one.
Now, look, I'm a great believer
in all forms of energy, but
we're putting a lot of people
out of work. Our energy policies
are a disaster. Our country is
losing so much in terms of
energy, in terms of paying off
our debt. You can't do what
you're looking to do with $20
trillion in debt.
The Obama administration, from
the time they've come in, is
over 230 years' worth of debt,
and he's topped it. He's doubled
it in a course of almost eight
years, seven-and-a-half years,
to be semi-exact.
So I will tell you this. We have
to do a much better job at
keeping our jobs. And we have
giving companies incentives to
build new companies or to
expand,
because they're not doing it.
21:18:59 And all you have to do
is look at Michigan and look at
Ohio and look at all
of these places where so many of
their jobs and their companies
are just leaving, they're
gone.
And, Hillary, I'd just ask you
this. You've been doing this for
30 years. Why are you
just thinking about these
solutions right now? For 30
years, you've been doing it, and
now you're just starting
to think of solutions.
CLINTON: Well, actually...
TRUMP: I will bring... excuse
me. I will bring back jobs. You
can't bring back jobs.
CLINTON: Well, actually, I have
thought about this quite a bit.
TRUMP: Yeah, for 30 years.
CLINTON: And I have... well, not
quite that long. I think my
husband did a pretty good
job in the 1990s. I think a lot
about what worked and how we can
make it work again...
TRUMP: Well, he
approved NAFTA...
(CROSSTALK)
CLINTON: million new
jobs, a balanced budget...
TRUMP: He approved NAFTA, which
is the single worst trade deal
ever approved in this country.
CLINTON: Incomes went up for
everybody. Manufacturing jobs
went up also in the 1990s, if
we're actually
going to look at the facts.
When I was in the Senate, I had
a number of trade deals that
came before me, and I held
them all to the same test. Will
they create jobs in America?
Will they raise incomes in
America? And are they good for
our national security? Some of
them I voted for. The biggest
one, a multinational one known
as CAFTA, I voted against. And
because I hold the same
standards as I look at all
of these trade deals.
But let's not assume that trade
is the only challenge we have in
the economy. I think
it is a part of it, and I've
said what I'm going to do. I'm
going to have a special
prosecutor.
We're going to enforce the trade
deals we have, and we're going
to hold people accountable.
When I was secretary of state,
we actually increased American
exports globally 30 percent.
We increased them to China 50
percent. So I know how to really
work to get new jobs
and to get exports that helped
to create more new jobs.
HOLT: Very quickly...
TRUMP: But you haven't done it
in 30 years or 26 years or any
number you want to...
CLINTON: Well, I've been
a senator, Donald...
TRUMP: You haven't done it.
You haven't done it.
CLINTON: And I have been
a secretary of state...
TRUMP: Excuse me.
CLINTON: And I
have done a lot...
TRUMP: Your husband signed
NAFTA, which was one of the
worst things that ever happened
to the manufacturing industry.
CLINTON: Well, that's your
opinion. That is your opinion.
TRUMP: You go to New England,
you go to Ohio, Pennsylvania,
you go anywhere you want,
Secretary
Clinton, and you will see
devastation where manufacture is
down 30, 40, sometimes 50
percent.
NAFTA is the worst trade deal
maybe ever signed anywhere, but
certainly ever signed in this
country.
And now you want to approve
Trans-Pacific Partnership. You
were totally in favor of
it. Then you heard what I was
saying, how bad it is, and you
said, I can't win that
debate. But you know that if you
did win, you would approve that,
and that will be almost
as bad as NAFTA. Nothing
will ever top NAFTA.
CLINTON: Well, that is just not
accurate. I was against it once
it was finally negotiated
and the terms were laid out.
I wrote about that in...
TRUMP: You called it
the gold standard.
(CROSSTALK)
TRUMP: You called it the gold
standard of trade deals. You
said it's the finest deal
you've ever seen.
CLINTON: No.
TRUMP: And then you heard what I
said about it, and all of a
sudden you were against it.
CLINTON: Well, Donald, I know
you live in your own reality,
but that is not the facts.
The facts are... I did say I
hoped it would be a good deal,
but when it was negotiated...
TRUMP: Not.
CLINTON: which I was not
responsible for, I concluded it
wasn't. I wrote about that
in my book...
TRUMP: So is it President
Obama's fault?
CLINTON: before you
even announced.
TRUMP: Is it President
Obama's fault?
CLINTON: Look, there
are differences...
TRUMP: Secretary, is it
President Obama's fault?
CLINTON: There are...
TRUMP: Because he's pushing it.
CLINTON: There are different
views about what's good for our
country, our economy, and our
leadership in the world. And I
think it's important to look at
what we need to do to
get the economy going again.
That's why I said new jobs with
rising incomes, investments,
not in more tax cuts that would
add $5 trillion to the debt.
TRUMP: But you have no plan.
CLINTON: But in... oh, but I do.
TRUMP: Secretary,
you have no plan.
CLINTON: In fact, I have written
a book about it. It's called
"Stronger Together." You can
pick it up tomorrow
at a bookstore...
TRUMP: That's about
all you've...
(CROSSTALK)
HOLT: Folks, we're going to...
CLINTON: or at an
airport near you.
HOLT: We're going to move to...
CLINTON: But it's because I see
this... we need to have strong
growth, fair growth, sustained
growth. We also have to look at
how we help families balance the
responsibilities at home
and the responsibilities
at business.
So we have a very robust set of
plans. And people have looked at
both of our plans, have
concluded that mine would create
10 million jobs and yours would
lose us 3.5 million jobs,
and explode the debt which
would have a recession.
TRUMP: You are going to approve
one of the biggest tax cuts in
history. 21:23:20 You
are going to approve one of the
biggest tax increases in
history. You are going to drive
business out. Your regulations
are a disaster, and you're going
to increase regulations all
over the place.
And by the way, my tax cut is
the biggest since Ronald Reagan.
I'm very proud of it.
It will create tremendous
numbers of new jobs. But
regulations, you are going to
regulate
these businesses
out of existence.
When I go around... Lester, I
tell you this, I've been all
over. And when I go around,
despite the tax cut, the
thing... the things that
business as in people like the
most is
the fact that I'm cutting
regulation. You have regulations
on top of regulations, and
new companies cannot form and
old companies are going out of
business. And you want to
increase the regulations
and make them even worse.
I'm going to cut regulations.
I'm going to cut taxes big, and
you're going to
raise taxes big
league, end of story.
HOLT: Let me get you to pause
right there, because we're going
to move into... we're
going to move into the next
segment. We're going to talk
taxes...
CLINTON: That can't... that
can't be left to stand.
HOLT: Please just take 30
seconds and then we're going to
go on.
CLINTON: I kind of assumed that
there would be a lot of these
charges and claims, and
so...
TRUMP: Facts.
CLINTON: So we have taken the
home page of my website,
HillaryClinton.com, and we've
turned it into a fact-checker.
So if you want to see in
real-time what the facts are,
please
go and take a look. Because
what I have proposed...
TRUMP: And take a look at
mine, also, and you'll see.
CLINTON: would not add a penny
to the debt, and your plans
would add $5 trillion
to the debt. What I have
proposed would cut regulations
and streamline them for small
businesses. What I have proposed
would be paid for by raising
taxes on the wealthy,
because they have made all the
gains in the economy. And I
think it's time that the wealthy
and corporations paid their fair
share to support this country.
HOLT: Well, you just
opened the next segment.
TRUMP: Well, could I just
finish... I think I...
(CROSSTALK)
HOLT: I'm going to give you
a chance right here...
TRUMP: I think I should... you
go to her website, and you take
a look at her website.
HOLT: with a new
15-minute segment...
TRUMP: She's going to raise
taxes $1.3 trillion.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, I'm going to...
TRUMP: And look at her website.
You know what? It's no
difference than this. She's
telling
us how to fight ISIS. Just go to
her website. She tells you how
to fight ISIS on her website.
I don't think General Douglas
MacArthur would like that too
much.
HOLT: The next segment,
we're continuing...
CLINTON: Well, at least I
have a plan to fight ISIS.
HOLT: achieving prosperity...
TRUMP: No, no, you're telling
the enemy everything you want to
do.
CLINTON: No, we're
not. No, we're not.
TRUMP: See, you're telling the
enemy everything you want to do.
No wonder you've been fighting
no wonder you've been fighting
ISIS your entire adult life.
CLINTON: That's a... that's...
go to the please, fact checkers,
get to work.
HOLT: OK, you are unpacking a
lot here. And we're still on the
issue of achieving prosperity.
And I want to talk about taxes.
The fundamental difference
between the two of you concerns
the wealthy.
Secretary Clinton, you're
calling for a tax increase on
the wealthiest Americans. I'd
like you to further defend that.
And, Mr. Trump, you're calling
for tax cuts for the
wealthy. I'd like you to defend
that. And this next two-minute
answer goes to you, Mr.
Trump.
TRUMP: Well, I'm really calling
for major jobs, because the
wealthy are going create
tremendous jobs. They're going
to expand their companies.
They're going to do a tremendous
job.
I'm getting rid of the carried
interest provision. And if you
really look, it's not a tax...
it's
really not a great thing for the
wealthy. It's a great thing for
the middle class. It's
a great thing for
companies to expand.
And when these people are going
to put billions and billions of
dollars into companies, and
when they're going to bring $2.5
trillion back from overseas,
where they can't bring
the money back, because
politicians like Secretary
Clinton won't allow them to
bring the money
back, because the taxes are so
onerous, and the bureaucratic
red tape, so what... is so
bad.
So what they're doing is they're
leaving our country, and
they're, believe it or not,
leaving
because taxes are too high and
because some of them have lots
of money outside of our
country. And instead of bringing
it back and putting the money to
work, because they can't
work out a deal to... and
everybody agrees it should be
brought back.
Instead of that, they're leaving
our country to get their money,
because they can't bring
their money back into our
country, because of bureaucratic
red tape, because they can't
get together. Because we have...
we have a president that can't
sit them around a table
and get them to
approve something.
And here's the thing.
Republicans and Democrats agree
that this should be done, $2.5
trillion.
I happen to think it's double
that. It's probably $5 trillion
that we can't bring into our
country,
Lester. And with a little
leadership, you'd get it in here
very quickly, and it could
be put to use on the inner
cities and lots of other things,
and it would be beautiful.
But we have no leadership. And
honestly, that starts with
Secretary Clinton. 21:28:01
HOLT: All right. You have two
minutes of the same question to
defend tax increases on the
wealthiest Americans,
Secretary Clinton.
CLINTON: I have a feeling that
by, the end of this evening, I'm
going to be blamed for
everything that's ever happened.
TRUMP: Why not?
CLINTON: Why not? Yeah, why not?
(LAUGHTER)
You know, just join the debate
by saying more crazy things.
Now, let me say this, it is
absolutely the case...
TRUMP: There's nothing crazy
about not letting our companies
bring their money back into
their country.
HOLT: This is... this is
Secretary Clinton's two minutes,
please.
TRUMP: Yes.
CLINTON: Yeah, well, let's start
the clock again, Lester. We've
looked at your tax proposals.
I don't see changes in the
corporate tax rates or the kinds
of proposals you're referring
to that would cause the
repatriation, bringing back of
money that's stranded overseas.
I
happen to support that.
TRUMP: Then you didn't read it.
CLINTON: I happen to... I happen
to support that in a way that
will actually work to our
benefit. But when I look at what
you have proposed, you have what
is called now the
21:29:01 Trump loophole, because
it would so advantage you and
the business you do.
You've proposed an
approach that has a...
TRUMP: Who gave it that name?
The first I've... who gave it
that name?
(CROSSTALK)
HOLT: Mr. Trump, this is
Secretary Clinton's two minutes.
CLINTON: $4 billion tax benefit
for your family. And when you
look at what you are
proposing...
TRUMP: How much? How
much for my family?
CLINTON: it is...
TRUMP: Lester, how much?
CLINTON: as I said, trumped-up
trickle-down. Trickle-down did
not work. It got us into
the mess we were in, in 2008 and
2009. Slashing taxes on the
wealthy hasn't worked.
And a lot of really smart,
wealthy people know that. And
they are saying, hey, we need
to do more to make the
contributions we should be
making to rebuild the middle
class.
CLINTON: I don't think top-down
works in America. I think
building the middle class,
investing
in the middle class, making
college debt-free so more young
people can get their education,
helping people refinance
their... their debt from college
at a lower rate. Those are the
kinds of things that will really
boost the economy. Broad-based,
inclusive growth is
what we need in America, not
more advantages for people at
the very top.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, we're...
TRUMP: Typical politician. All
talk, no action. Sounds good,
doesn't work. Never going to
happen. Our country is suffering
because people like Secretary
Clinton have made such bad
decisions in terms of our jobs
and in terms of what's going on.
Now, look, we have the worst
revival of an economy since the
Great Depression. And believe
me: We're in a bubble right now.
And the only thing that looks
good is the stock market,
but if you raise interest rates
even a little bit, that's going
to come crashing down.
We are in a big, fat, ugly
bubble. And we better be awfully
careful. And we have a Fed
that's doing political things.
This Janet Yellen of the Fed.
The Fed is doing political
by keeping the interest rates at
this level. And believe me: The
day Obama goes off, and
he leaves, and goes out to the
golf course for the rest of his
life to play golf 21:31:00,
when they raise interest rates,
you're going to see some very
bad things happen, because
the Fed is not doing their job.
The Fed is being more political
than Secretary Clinton.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, we're talking
about the burden that Americans
have to pay, yet you have not
released your tax returns. And
the reason nominees have
released their returns for
decades
is so that voters will know if
their potential president owes
money to... who he owes it
to and any business conflicts.
Don't Americans have a right to
know if there are any conflicts
of interest?
TRUMP: I don't mind releasing...
I'm under a routine audit. And
it'll be released. And
as soon as the audit's
finished, it will be released.
But you will learn more about
Donald Trump by going down to
the federal elections, where
I filed a 104-page essentially
financial statement of sorts,
the forms that they have. It
shows
income... in fact, the income...
I just looked today... the
income is filed at $694 million
for this past year, $694
million. If you would have told
me I was going to make that 15
or
20 years ago, I would
have been very surprised.
But that's the kind of thinking
that our country needs. When we
have a country that's doing
so badly, that's being ripped
off by every single country in
the world, it's the kind
of thinking that our country
needs, because everybody...
Lester, we have a trade deficit
with all of the countries that
we do business with, of almost
$800 billion a year. You know
what that is? That means, who's
negotiating these trade deals?
We have people that are
political hacks negotiating our
trade deals.
HOLT: The IRS says an audit...
TRUMP: Excuse me.
HOLT: of your taxes... you're
perfectly free to release your
taxes during an audit.
And so the question, does the
public's right to know outweigh
your personal...
TRUMP: Well, I told you, I will
release them as soon as the
audit. Look, I've been under
audit almost for 15 years.
21:33:00 I know a lot of wealthy
people that have never been
audited. I said, do you get
audited? I get audited almost
every year.
And in a way, I should be
complaining. I'm not even
complaining. I don't mind it.
It's
almost become a way of life. I
get audited by the IRS. But
other people don't.
I will say this. We have a
situation in this country that
has to be taken care of. I will
release my tax returns...
against my lawyer's wishes...
when she releases her 33,000
e-mails
that have been deleted. As soon
as she releases them, I will
release.
(APPLAUSE)
I will release my tax returns.
And that's against... my
lawyers, they say, "Don't do
it." I will tell you this. No...
in fact, watching shows, they're
reading the papers.
Almost every lawyer says, you
don't release your returns until
the audit's complete. When
the audit's complete, I'll do
it. But I would go against them
if she releases her e-mails.
HOLT: So it's negotiable?
TRUMP: It's not negotiable, no.
Let her release the e-mails. Why
did she delete 33,000...
HOLT: Well, I'll let her answer
that. But let me just admonish
the audience one more
time. There was an agreement. We
did ask you to be silent, so it
would be helpful for us.
Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: Well, I think you've
seen another example of
bait-and-switch here. For 40
years,
everyone running for president
has released their tax returns.
You can go and see nearly,
I think, 39, 40 years of our tax
returns, but everyone has done
it. We know the IRS
has made clear there is no
prohibition on releasing it when
you're under audit.
So you've got to ask yourself,
why won't he release his tax
returns? And I think there
may be a couple of reasons.
First, maybe he's not as rich as
he says he is. Second, maybe
he's not as charitable
as he claims to be.
CLINTON: Third, we don't know
all of his business dealings,
but we have been told through
investigative
reporting that he owes about
$650 million to Wall Street and
foreign banks. Or maybe
he doesn't want the American
people, all of you watching
tonight, to know that he's paid
nothing in federal taxes,
because the only years that
anybody's ever seen were a
couple
of years when he had to turn
them over to state authorities
when he was trying to get
a casino license, and they
showed he didn't pay any federal
income tax.
21:35:27 TRUMP: That
makes me smart.
CLINTON: So if he's paid zero,
that means zero for troops, zero
for vets, zero for schools
or health. And I think probably
he's not all that enthusiastic
about having the rest of
our country see what the real
reasons are, because it must be
something really important,
even terrible, that
he's trying to hide.
And the financial disclosure
statements, they don't give you
the tax rate. They don't give
you all the details that tax
returns would. And it just seems
to me that this is something
that the American people deserve
to see. And I have no reason to
believe that he's ever
going to release his tax
returns, because there's
something he's hiding.
And we'll guess. We'll keep
guessing at what it might be
that he's hiding. But I think
the question is, were he ever to
get near the White House, what
would be those conflicts?
Who does he owe money to? Well,
he owes you the answers to that,
and he should provide
them.
HOLT: He also... he also raised
the issue of your e-mails. Do
you want to respond to
that?
CLINTON: I do. You know, I made
a mistake using a private
e-mail. TRUMP: That's for
sure.
CLINTON: And if I had to do it
over again, I would, obviously,
do it differently. But
I'm not going to make any
excuses. It was a mistake, and I
take responsibility for that.
HOLT: Mr. Trump?
TRUMP: That was more than a
mistake. That was done
purposely. OK? That was not a
mistake.
That was done purposely. When
you have your staff taking the
Fifth Amendment, taking the
Fifth so they're not prosecuted,
when you have the man that set
up the illegal server
taking the Fifth, I think it's
disgraceful. And believe me,
this country thinks it's...
really
thinks it's disgraceful, also.
As far as my tax returns, you
don't learn that much from tax
returns. That I can tell
you. You learn a lot from
financial disclosure. And you
should go down and take a look
at
that.
The other thing, I'm extremely
underleveraged. The report that
said $650... which, by the
way, a lot of friends of mine
that know my business say, boy,
that's really not a lot
of money. It's not a lot of
money relative to what I had.
The buildings that were in
question, they said in the same
report, which was... actually,
it wasn't even a bad story, to
be honest with you, but the
buildings are worth $3.9
billion.
And the $650 isn't even on that.
But it's not $650. It's much
less than that.
But I could give you a list of
banks, I would if that would
help you, I would give you
a list of banks. These are very
fine institutions, very fine
banks. I could do that very
quickly.
I am very underleveraged. I have
a great company. I have a
tremendous income. And the
reason
I say that is not in a
braggadocios way. It's because
it's about time that this
country
had somebody running it that
has an idea about money.
When we have $20 trillion in
debt, and our country's a mess,
you know, it's one thing
to have $20 trillion in debt and
our roads are good and our
bridges are good and
everything's
in great shape, our airports.
21:38:25 Our airports are like
from a third world country.
You land at LaGuardia, you land
at Kennedy, you land at LAX, you
land at Newark, and you
come in from Dubai and Qatar and
you see these incredible... you
come in from China, you
see these incredible airports,
and you land we've become a
third world country.
So the worst of all things has
happened. We owe $20 trillion,
and we're a mess. We haven't
even started. And we've spent $6
trillion in the Middle East,
according to a report
that I just saw. Whether it's 6
or 5, but it looks like it's 6,
$6 trillion in the Middle
East, we could have rebuilt
our country twice.
And it's really a shame. And
it's politicians like Secretary
Clinton that have caused this
problem. Our country has
tremendous problems. We're a
debtor nation. We're a serious
debtor
nation. And we have a country
that needs new roads, new
tunnels, new bridges, new
airports,
new schools, new hospitals. And
we don't have the money, because
it's been squandered on
so many of your ideas.
HOLT: We'll let you respond and
we'll move on to the next
segment.
CLINTON: And maybe because you
haven't paid any federal income
tax for a lot of years.
(APPLAUSE)
And the other thing I
think is important...
TRUMP: It would be
squandered, too, believe me.
CLINTON: is if your... if your
main claim to be president of
the United States is your
business, then I think we should
talk about that. You know, your
campaign manager said
that you built a lot of
businesses on the backs of
little guys.
And, indeed, I have met a lot of
the people who were stiffed by
you and your businesses,
Donald. I've met dishwashers,
painters, architects, glass
installers, marble installers,
drapery
installers, like my dad was, who
you refused to pay when they
finished the work that you
asked them to do.
We have an architect in the
audience who designed one of
your clubhouses at one of your
golf
courses. It's a beautiful
facility. It immediately was put
to use. And you wouldn't pay
what
the man needed to be paid, what
he was charging you to do...
TRUMP: Maybe he didn't do a good
job and I was unsatisfied with
his work...
CLINTON: Well, to...
TRUMP: Which our country
should do, too.
CLINTON: Do the thousands of
people that you have stiffed
over the course of your business
not deserve some kind of apology
from someone who has taken their
labor, taken the goods
that they produced, and
then refused to pay them?
21:40 I can only say that I'm
certainly relieved that my late
father never did business with
you. He provided a good
middle-class life for us, but
the people he worked for, he
expected
the bargain to be
kept on both sides.
And when we talk about your
business, you've taken business
bankruptcy six times. There
are a lot of great
businesspeople that have never
taken bankruptcy once. You call
yourself
the King of Debt. You talk about
leverage. You even at one time
suggested that you would
try to negotiate down the
national debt of the United
States.
TRUMP: Wrong. Wrong.
CLINTON: Well, sometimes there's
not a direct transfer of skills
from business to government,
sometimes what hapened in
business would be bad for
government.
HOLT: Let's let Mr. Trump...
CLINTON: And we need to
be very clear about that.
TRUMP: So, yeah, I think... I do
think it's time. Look, it's all
words, it's all sound
bites. I built an unbelievable
company. Some of the greatest
assets anywhere in the world,
real estate assets anywhere in
the world, beyond the United
States, in Europe, lots
of different places. It's
an unbelievable company.
But on occasion, four times, we
used certain laws that are
there. And when Secretary
Clinton
talks about people that didn't
get paid, first of all, they did
get paid a lot, but taken
advantage of the
laws of the nation.
Now, if you want to change the
laws, you've been there a long
time, change the laws. But
I take advantage of the laws of
the nation because I'm running a
company. My obligation
right now is to do well for
myself, my family, my employees,
for my companies. And that's
what I do.
But what she doesn't say is that
tens of thousands of people that
are unbelievably happy and
that love me. I'll give you an
example. We're just opening up
on Pennsylvania Avenue right
next to the White House, so if I
don't get there one way, I'm
going to get to Pennsylvania
Avenue another.
But we're opening the Old Post
Office. Under budget, ahead of
schedule, saved tremendous
money. I'm a year ahead of
schedule. And that's what this
country should be doing.
We build roads and they cost two
and three and four times what
they're supposed to cost.
We buy products for our military
and they come in at costs that
are so far above what
they were supposed to be,
because we don't have people
that know what they're doing.
When we look at the budget, the
budget is bad to a large extent
because we have people
that have no idea as to what to
do and how to buy. The Trump
International is way under
budget and way ahead of
schedule. And we should be able
to do that for our country.
HOLT: Well, we're well behind
schedule, so I want to move to
our next segment. We move
into our next segment talking
about America's direction. And
let's start by talking about
race.
The share of Americans who say
race relations are bad in this
country is the highest it's
been in decades, much of it
amplified by shootings of
African-Americans by police, as
we've seen
recently in Charlotte and Tulsa.
Race has been a big issue in
this campaign, and one
of you is going to have to
bridge a very wide and bitter
gap.
So how do you heal the divide?
Secretary Clinton, you get two
minutes on this.
CLINTON: Well, you're right.
Race remains a significant
challenge in our country.
Unfortunately,
race still determines too much,
often determines where people
live, determines what kind of
education in their public
schools they can get, and, yes,
it determines how they're
treated
in the criminal justice system.
We've just seen those two tragic
examples in both Tulsa
and Charlotte.
And we've got to do several
things at the same time. We have
to restore trust between
communities and the police. We
have to work to make sure that
our police are using the
best training, the best
techniques, that they're well
prepared to use force only when
necessary.
Everyone should be respected by
the law, and everyone should
respect the law.
CLINTON: Right now, that's not
the case in a lot of our
neighborhoods. So I have, ever
since the first day of my
campaign, called for criminal
justice reform. I've laid out
a platform that I think would
begin to remedy some of the
problems we have in the criminal
justice system.
But we also have to recognize,
in addition to the challenges
that we face with policing,
21:45:35 there are so many good,
brave police officers who
equally want reform. So we have
to bring communities together in
order to begin working on that
as a mutual goal. And
we've got to get guns out of the
hands of people who should not
have them.
The gun epidemic is the leading
cause of death of young
African-American men, more than
the next nine causes put
together. So we have to do two
things, as I said. We have to
restore
trust. We have to work with the
police. We have to make sure
they respect the communities
and the communities respect
them. And we have to tackle the
plague of gun violence, which
is a big contributor to a lot of
the problems that we're seeing
today.
HOLT: All right, Mr. Trump, you
have two minutes. How do you
heal the divide?
TRUMP: Well, first of all,
Secretary Clinton doesn't want
to use a couple of words, and
that's law and order. And we
need law and order. If we don't
have it, we're not going
to have a country.
And when I look at what's going
on in Charlotte, a city I love,
a city where I have investments,
when I look at what's going on
throughout various parts of our
country, whether it's
I mean, I can just keep naming
them all day long... we need law
and order in our country.
I just got today the, as you
know, the endorsement of the
Fraternal Order of Police, we
just
just came in. We have
endorsements from, I think,
almost every police group,
very... I
mean, a large percentage of
them in the United States.
We have a situation where we
have our inner cities,
African-Americans, Hispanics are
living in he'll because it's so
dangerous. You walk down the
street, you get shot.
21:47:17 In Chicago, they've had
thousands of shootings,
thousands since January 1st.
Thousands of shootings. And I'm
saying, where is this? Is this a
war-torn country? What
are we doing? And we have to
stop the violence. We have to
bring back law and order. In a
place like Chicago, where
thousands of people have been
killed, thousands over the last
number of years, in fact, almost
4,000 have been killed since
Barack Obama became president,
over... almost 4,000 people in
Chicago have been killed. We
have to bring back law and
order.
Now, whether or not in a place
like Chicago you do stop and
frisk, which worked very well,
Mayor Giuliani is here, worked
very well in New York. It
brought the crime rate way down.
But you take the gun away from
criminals that shouldn't be
having it.
We have gangs roaming the
street. And in many cases,
they're illegally here, illegal
immigrants.
And they have guns. And they
shoot people. And we have to be
very strong. And we have
to be very vigilant.
We have to be... we have to know
what we're doing. Right now, our
police, in many cases,
are afraid to do anything. We
have to protect our inner
cities, because African-American
communities are being decimated
by crime, decimated.
HOLT: Your two... your two
minutes expired, but I do want
to follow up. 21:48:38
Stop-and-frisk
was ruled unconstitutional in
New York, because it largely
singled out black and Hispanic
young men.
TRUMP: No, you're wrong. It went
before a judge, who was a very
against-police judge.
It was taken away from her. And
our mayor, our new mayor,
refused to go forward with
the case. They would have won an
appeal. If you look at it,
throughout the country, there
are many places
where it's allowed.
HOLT: The argument is that it's
a form of racial profiling.
TRUMP: No, the argument is that
we have to take the guns away
from these people that
have them and they are bad
people that shouldn't have them.
These are felons. These are
people that are bad people that
shouldn't be... 21:49:18 when
you have 3,000 shootings in
Chicago from January 1st, when
you have 4,000 people killed in
Chicago by guns, from the
beginning of the presidency of
Barack Obama, his hometown,
you have to have stop-and-frisk.
You need more police. You need a
better community, you know,
relation. You don't have good
community
relations in Chicago. It's
terrible. I have property there.
It's terrible what's going
on in Chicago.
But when you look... and
Chicago's not the only... you go
to Ferguson, you go to so many
different places. You need
better relationships. I agree
with Secretary Clinton on this.
TRUMP: You need better
relationships between the
communities and the police,
because in
some cases, it's not good.
But you look at Dallas, where
the relationships were really
studied, the relationships were
really a beautiful thing, and
then five police officers were
killed one night very violently.
So there's some bad things going
on. Some really bad things.
HOLT: Secretary Clinton...
TRUMP: But we need... Lester, we
need law and order. And we need
law and order in the
inner cities, because the people
that are most affected by what's
happening are African-American
and Hispanic people. And it's
very unfair to them what our
politicians are allowing
to happen.
HOLT: Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: 21:50:36 Well, I've
heard... I've heard Donald say
this at his rallies, and
it's really unfortunate that he
paints such a dire negative
picture of black communities
in our country.
TRUMP: Ugh.
CLINTON: You know, the vibrancy
of the black church, the black
businesses that employ so
many people, the opportunities
that so many families are
working to provide for their
kids. There's a lot that we
should be proud of and we should
be supporting and lifting
up.
But we do always have to make
sure we keep people safe. There
are the right ways of doing
it, and then there are ways that
are ineffective. Stop-and-frisk
was found to be unconstitutional
and, in part, because it was
ineffective. It did not do what
it needed to do.
Now, I believe in community
policing. And, in fact, violent
crime is one-half of what
it was in 1991. Property crime
is down 40 percent. We just
don't want to see it creep
back up. We've had 25 years
of very good cooperation.
But there were some problems,
some unintended consequences.
Too many young African-American
and Latino men ended up in jail
for nonviolent offenses. And
it's just a fact that if you're
a young African-American man and
you do the same thing as a young
white man, you are more
likely to be arrested, charged,
convicted, and incarcerated. So
we've got to address
the systemic racism in our
criminal justice system.
21:52:20 We cannot just say law
and
order. We have to say... we have
to come forward with a plan that
is going to divert people
from the criminal justice
system, deal with mandatory
minimum sentences, which have
put
too many people away for too
long for doing too little.
We need to have more second
chance programs. I'm glad that
we're ending private prisons
in the federal system; I want to
see them ended in the state
system. You shouldn't have
a profit motivation to fill
prison cells with young
Americans. So there are some
positive
ways we can work on this.
And I believe strongly that
commonsense gun safety measures
would assist us. Right now
and this is something Donald has
supported, along with the gun
lobby... right now, we've
got too many military-style
weapons on the streets. In a lot
of places, our police are
outgunned. We need comprehensive
background checks, and we need
to keep guns out of the
hands of those who will do harm.
And we finally need to pass a
prohibition on anyone who's on
the terrorist watch list
from being able to buy a gun in
our country. 21:53:39 If you're
too dangerous to fly, you
are too dangerous to buy a gun.
So there are things we can do,
and we ought to do it in
a bipartisan way.
HOLT: Secretary Clinton, last
week, you said we've got to do
everything possible to improve
policing, to go right at
implicit bias. 21:53:50 Do you
believe that police are
implicitly
biased against black people?
CLINTON: Lester, I think
implicit bias is a problem for
everyone, not just police. I
think, unfortunately, too many
of us in our great country jump
to conclusions about each
other. And therefore, I think we
need all of us to be asking hard
questions about, you
know, why am I feeling this way?
But when it comes to policing,
since it can have literally
fatal consequences, I have
said, in my first budget, we
would put money into that budget
to help us deal with implicit
bias by retraining a lot
of our police officers.
I've met with a group of very
distinguished, experienced
police chiefs a few weeks ago.
They admit it's an issue.
They've got a lot of concerns.
21:54:38 Mental health is one
of the biggest concerns, because
now police are having to handle
a lot of really difficult
mental health problems
on the street.
They want support, they want
more training, they want more
assistance. And I think the
federal government could be in a
position where we would offer
and provide that.
HOLT: Mr. Trump...
TRUMP: I'd like to
respond to that.
HOLT: Please.
TRUMP: First of all, I agree,
and a lot of people even within
my own party want to give
certain rights to people on
watch lists and no-fly lists. I
agree with you. When a person
is on a watch list or a no-fly
list, and I have the endorsement
of the NRA, which I'm
very proud of. These are very,
very good people, and they're
protecting the Second Amendment.
But I think we have to look very
strongly at no-fly lists and
watch lists. And when
people are on there, even if
they shouldn't be on there,
we'll help them, we'll help them
legally, we'll help them get
off. But I tend to agree with
that quite strongly.
I do want to bring up the fact
that you were the one that
brought up the words 21:55:33
super-predator about young black
youth. And that's a term that I
think was a... it's... it's
been horribly met, as you know.
I think you've apologized for
it. But I think it was a
terrible
thing to say.
And when it comes to
stop-and-frisk, you know, you're
talking about takes guns away.
Well,
I'm talking about taking guns
away from gangs and people that
use them. And I don't think
I really don't think you
disagree with me on this, if you
want to know the truth.
I think maybe there's a
political reason why you can't
say it, but I really don't
believe
in New York City,
stop-and-frisk, we had 2,200
murders, and stop-and-frisk
brought
it down to 500 murders. Five
hundred murders is a lot of
murders. It's hard to believe,
500 is like supposed to be good?
But we went from 2,200 to 500.
And it was continued on by Mayor
Bloomberg. And it was
terminated by current mayor. But
stop-and-frisk had a tremendous
impact on the safety
of New York City. Tremendous
beyond belief. So when you say
it has no impact, it really
did. It had a very,
very big impact.
CLINTON: Well, it's also fair to
say, if we're going to talk
about mayors, that under the
current mayor, crime has
continued to drop, including
murders. So there is...
TRUMP: No, you're
wrong. You're wrong.
CLINTON: No, I'm not.
TRUMP: Murders are up.
All right. You check it.
CLINTON: New York... New York
has done an excellent job. And I
give credit... I give
credit across the board going
back two mayors, two police
chiefs, because it has worked.
And other communities need to
come together to do what will
work, as well.
Look, one murder is too many.
But it is important that we
learn about what has been
effective.
And not go to things that sound
good that really did not have
the kind of impact that
we would want. Who disagrees
with keeping neighborhoods safe?
But let's also add, 21:57:30 no
one should disagree about
respecting the rights of young
men who live in those
neighborhoods. And so we need to
do a better job of working,
again,
with the communities, faith
communities, business
communities, as well as the
police to try
to deal with this problem.
HOLT: This conversation is about
race. And so, Mr. Trump, I have
to ask you for five...
TRUMP: I'd like to just
respond, if I might.
HOLT: Please... 20 seconds.
TRUMP: I'd just like to respond.
HOLT: Please respond, then I've
got a quick follow-up for you.
TRUMP: I will. Look, the
African-American community has
been let down by our
politicians.
They talk good around election
time, like right now, and after
the election, they said,
see ya later, I'll see
you in four years.
The African-American
community... because... Look,
the community within the inner
cities
has been so badly treated.
They've been abused and used in
order to get votes by Democrat
politicians, because that's what
it is. They've controlled these
communities for up to 100
years.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, let me...
(CROSSTALK)
CLINTON: Well,
I... I do think...
TRUMP: And I will tell you, you
look at the inner cities... and
I just left Detroit, and
I just left Philadelphia, and I
just... you know, you've seen
me, I've been all over the
place. You decided to stay home,
and that's OK. But I will tell
you, I've been all over.
And I've met some of the
greatest people I'll ever meet
within these communities. And
they
are very, very upset with what
their politicians have told them
and what their politicians
have done.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, I...
CLINTON: 21:58:53 I think... I
think... I think Donald just
criticized me for preparing
for this debate. And, yes, I
did. And you know what else I
prepared for? I prepared
to be president. 21:59:06 And
I think that's a good thing.
(APPLAUSE)
HOLT: Mr. Trump, for five years,
you perpetuated a false claim
that the nation's first black
president was not a natural-born
citizen. You questioned his
legitimacy. In the last
couple of weeks, you
acknowledged what most Americans
have accepted for years: The
president
was born in the United States.
Can you tell us what took you so
long?
TRUMP: I'll tell you very...
well, just very simple to say.
Sidney Blumenthal works for
the campaign and close... very
close friend of Secretary
Clinton. And her campaign
manager,
Patti Doyle, went to... during
the campaign, her campaign
against President Obama, fought
very hard. And you can go look
it up, and you can check it out.
TRUMP: And if you look at CNN
this past week, Patti Solis
Doyle was on Wolf Blitzer saying
that this happened. Blumenthal
sent McClatchy, highly respected
reporter at McClatchy, to
Kenya to find out about it. They
were pressing it very hard. She
failed to get the birth
certificate.
When I got involved, I didn't
fail. I got him to give the
birth certificate. So I'm
satisfied with it. And I'll tell
you why I'm satisfied with it.
HOLT: That was...
(CROSSTALK)
TRUMP: Because I want to get on
to defeating ISIS, because I
want to get on to creating
jobs, because I want to get on
to having a strong border,
because I want to get on to
things that are very important
to me and that are very
important to the country.
HOLT: I will let you respond.
It's important. But I just want
to get the answer here. The
birth certificate was produced
in 2011. You've continued to
tell the story and question the
president's legitimacy in
2012, '13, '14, '15...
TRUMP: Yeah.
HOLT: as recently as January. So
the question is, what changed
your mind?
TRUMP: Well, nobody was pressing
it, nobody was caring much about
it. I figured you'd
ask the question tonight, of
course. But nobody was caring
much about it. But I was the one
that got him to produce the
birth certificate. And I think I
did a good job.
Secretary Clinton also fought
it. I mean, you know... now,
everybody in mainstream is
going to say, oh, that's not
true. Look, it's true. Sidney
Blumenthal sent a reporter...
you
just have to take a look at CNN,
the last week, the interview
with your former campaign
manager. And she was involved.
But just like she can't bring
back jobs, she can't produce.
HOLT: I'm sorry. I'm just going
to follow up... and I will let
you respond to that,
because there's a lot there. But
we're talking about racial
healing in this segment. What
do you say to Americans,
people of color who...
(CROSSTALK)
TRUMP: Well, it was very... I
say nothing. I say nothing,
because I was able to get him
to produce it. He should have
produced it a long time before.
I say nothing.
But let me just tell you. When
you talk about healing, I think
that I've developed very,
very good relationships over the
last little while with the
African-American community.
I think you can see that.
And I feel that they really
wanted me to come to that
conclusion. And I think I did a
great
job and a great service not only
for the country, but even for
the president, in getting him
to produce his
birth certificate.
HOLT: Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: Well, just
listen to what you heard.
(LAUGHTER)
And clearly, as Donald just
admitted, he knew he was going
to stand on this debate stage,
and Lester Holt was going to be
asking us questions, so he tried
to put the whole racist
birther lie to bed.
But it can't be dismissed that
easily. He has really started
his political activity
based on this racist lie that
our first black president was
not an American citizen. There
was absolutely no evidence for
it, but he persisted, he
persisted year after year,
because
some of his supporters, people
that he was trying to bring into
his fold, apparently
believed it or wanted
to believe it.
But, remember, Donald started
his career back in 1973 being
sued by the Justice Department
for racial discrimination
because 22:03:18 he would not
rent apartments in one of his
developments to
African-Americans, and he made
sure that the people who worked
for him
understood that was the policy.
He actually was sued twice by
the Justice Department.
So he has a long record of
engaging in racist behavior. And
the birther lie was a very
hurtful
one. You know, Barack Obama is a
man of great dignity. And I
could tell how much it bothered
him and annoyed him that this
was being touted and used
against him.
But I like to remember what
Michelle Obama said in her
amazing speech at our Democratic
National Convention: When they
go low, we go high. And Barack
Obama went high, despite
Donald Trump's best efforts
to bring him down.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, you can respond
and we're going to move on to
the next segment.
TRUMP: I would love to respond.
First of all, I got to watch in
preparing for this some
of your debates against Barack
Obama. You treated him with
terrible disrespect. And
I watched the way you talk now
about how lovely everything is
and how wonderful you are. It
doesn't work that way. You were
after him, you were trying to...
you even sent out or
your campaign sent out pictures
of him in a certain garb, very
famous pictures. I don't
think you can deny that.
But just last week, your
campaign manager said it was
true. So when you tried to act
22:04:42 holier than thou, it
really doesn't work. It really
doesn't.
Now, as far as the lawsuit, yes,
when I was very young, I went
into my father's company,
had a real estate company in
Brooklyn and Queens, and we,
along with many, many other
companies throughout the
country... it was a federal
lawsuit... were sued. We settled
the suit with zero... with no
admission of guilt. It was very
easy to do.
TRUMP: I notice you bring that
up a lot. And, you know, I also
notice the very nasty
commercials
that you do on me in so many
different ways, which I don't do
on you. Maybe I'm trying
to save the money.
But, frankly, I look... I look
at that, and I say, isn't that
amazing? Because I settled
that lawsuit with no admission
of guilt, but that was a lawsuit
brought against many real
estate firms, and it's
just one of those things.
I'll go one step further. In
Palm Beach, Florida, tough
community, a brilliant
community, a
wealthy community, probably the
wealthiest community there is in
the world, I opened
a club, and really got great
credit for it. No discrimination
against African-Americans,
against Muslims, against
anybody. And it's a tremendously
successful club. And I'm so
glad I did it. And I have been
given great credit for what I
did. And I'm very, very
proud of it. And that's the way
I feel. That is the true way I
feel.
HOLT: Our next segment is called
"Securing America." We want to
start with a 21st century
war happening every day in this
country. Our institutions are
under cyber attack, and our
secrets are being stolen. So my
question is, who's behind it?
And how do we fight it?
Secretary Clinton, this
answer goes to you.
CLINTON: Well, I think cyber
security, cyber warfare will be
one of the biggest challenges
facing the next president,
because clearly we're facing at
this point two different kinds
of adversaries. There are the
independent hacking groups that
do it mostly for commercial
reasons to try to steal
information that they can use to
make money.
22:06:49 But increasingly, we
are seeing cyber attacks coming
from states, organs of states.
The most recent and troubling of
these has been Russia. There's
no doubt now that Russia
has used cyber attacks against
all kinds of organizations in
our country, and I am deeply
concerned about this. I know
Donald's very praiseworthy of
Vladimir Putin, but Putin
is playing a really...
(CROSSTALK)
CLINTON: tough, long game here.
And one of the things he's done
is to let loose cyber
attackers to hack into
government files, to hack into
personal files, hack into the
Democratic
National Committee. And we
recently have learned that, you
know, that this is one of their
preferred methods of trying to
wreak havoc and collect
information. We need to make it
very clear... whether it's
Russia, China, Iran or anybody
else... the United States
has much greater capacity. And
we are not going to sit idly by
and permit state actors
to go after our information, our
private-sector information or
our public-sector information.
And we're going to have to make
it clear that we don't want to
use the kinds of tools that
we have. We don't want to engage
in a different kind of warfare.
But we will defend the citizens
of this country.
And the Russians need to
understand that. I think they've
been treating it as almost
a probing, how far would we go,
how much would we do. And that's
why I was so... I was so
shocked when Donald publicly
22:08:41 invited Putin to hack
into Americans. That is just
unacceptable. It's one of the
reasons why 50 national security
officials who served
in Republican information
in administrations...
HOLT: Your two minutes
have expired.
CLINTON: have said that Donald
is unfit to be the
commander-in-chief. It's
comments
like that that really worry
people who understand the
threats that we face.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, you have two
minutes and the same question.
Who's behind it? And how
do we fight it?
TRUMP: I do want to say that I
was just endorsed and more are
coming next week... it will
be over 200 admirals, many of
them here... admirals and
generals endorsed me to lead
this country.
That just happened, and many
more are coming. And I'm very
proud of it.
In addition, I was just endorsed
by ICE. They've never endorsed
anybody before on immigration.
I was just endorsed by ICE. I
was just recently endorsed...
16,500 Border Patrol agents.
So when Secretary Clinton talks
about this, I mean, I'll take
the admirals and I'll take
the generals any day over the
political hacks that I see that
have led our country so
brilliantly
over the last 10 years with
their knowledge. OK? Because
look at the mess that we're in.
Look at the mess that we're in.
As far as the cyber, I agree to
parts of what Secretary Clinton
said. 22:09:52 We should
be better than anybody else, and
perhaps we're not. I don't think
anybody knows it was Russia
that broke into the DNC. She's
saying Russia, Russia, Russia,
but I don't... maybe it was.
I mean, it could be Russia, but
it could also be China. It could
also be lots of other people.
It also could be somebody
sitting on their bed that weighs
400 pounds, OK?
TRUMP: You don't know
who broke in to DNC.
But what did we learn with DNC?
We learned that 22:10:29 Bernie
Sanders was taken advantage
of by your people, by Debbie
Wasserman Schultz. Look what
happened to her. But Bernie
Sanders
was taken advantage of.
That's what we learned.
Now, whether that was Russia,
whether that was China, whether
it was another country,
we don't know, because the truth
is, under President Obama we've
lost control of things
that we used to
have control over.
We came in with the Internet, we
came up with the Internet, and I
think Secretary Clinton
and myself would agree very
much, when you look at what ISIS
is doing with the Internet,
they're beating us at
our own game. ISIS.
So we have to get very, very
tough on cyber and cyber
warfare. It is... it is a huge
problem.
I have a son. He's 10 years old.
He has computers. He is so good
with these computers, it's
unbelievable.
The security aspect of cyber is
very, very tough. And maybe it's
hardly doable.
But I will say, we are not doing
the job we should be doing. But
that's true throughout
our whole governmental society.
We have so many things that we
have to do better, Lester,
and certainly cyber
is one of them.
HOLT: Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: Well, I think there are
a number of issues that we
should be addressing. I
have put forth a plan to defeat
ISIS. It does involve going
after them online. I think we
need to do much more with our
tech companies to prevent ISIS
and their operatives from
being able to use the Internet
to radicalize, even direct
people in our country and Europe
and elsewhere.
But we also have to intensify
our air strikes against ISIS and
eventually support our Arab
and Kurdish partners to be able
to actually take out ISIS in
Raqqa, end their claim of
being a Caliphate.
We're making progress. Our
military is assisting in Iraq.
And we're hoping that within the
year we'll be able to push ISIS
out of Iraq and then, you know,
really squeeze them in
Syria.
But we have to be cognizant of
the fact that they've had
foreign fighters coming to
volunteer
for them, foreign money, foreign
weapons, 22:12:35 so we have to
make this the top priority.
And I would also do everything
possible to take out their
leadership. I was involved
in a number of efforts to take
out Al Qaida leadership when I
was secretary of state,
including, of course, taking out
bin Laden. And I think we need
to go after Baghdadi,
as well, make that one of our
organizing principles. Because
we've got to defeat ISIS, and
we've
got to do everything we can to
disrupt their propaganda efforts
online.
HOLT: You mention ISIS, and we
think of ISIS certainly as over
there, but there are American
citizens who have been inspired
to commit acts of terror on
American soil, the latest
incident, of course, the
bombings we just saw in New York
and New Jersey, the knife
attack at a mall in Minnesota,
in the last year, deadly attacks
in San Bernardino and
Orlando. I'll ask this to both
of you. Tell us specifically how
you would prevent homegrown
attacks by American
citizens, Mr. Trump?
TRUMP: Well, first I have to say
one thing, very important.
22:13:32 Secretary Clinton
is talking about taking out
ISIS. "We will take out ISIS."
Well, President Obama and
Secretary Clinton created a
vacuum the way they got out of
Iraq, because they got out
what, they shouldn't have been
in, but once they got in, the
way they got out was
a disaster. And ISIS was formed.
So she talks about taking them
out. She's been doing it a long
time. She's been trying
to take them out for a long
time. But they wouldn't have
even been formed if they left
some troops behind, like 10,000
or maybe something more than
that. And then you wouldn't have
had them.
Or, as I've been saying for a
long time, and I think you'll
agree, because I said it to
you once, had we taken the
oil... and we should have taken
the oil... ISIS would not have
been able to form either,
because the oil was their
primary source of income. And
now
they have the oil all over the
place, including the oil... a
lot of the oil in Libya, which
was another one
of her disasters.
HOLT: Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: 22:14:31 Well, I hope
the fact-checkers are turning up
the volume and really working
hard. Donald supported
the invasion of Iraq.
TRUMP: Wrong.
CLINTON: That is absolutely
proved over and over again.
TRUMP: Wrong. Wrong.
CLINTON: He actually advocated
for the actions we took in Libya
and urged that Gadhafi be
taken out, after actually doing
some business with him one time.
CLINTON: But the larger point...
and he says this constantly...
is George W. Bush made
the agreement about when
American troops would leave
Iraq, not Barack Obama.
And the only way that American
troops could have stayed in Iraq
is to get an agreement
from the then-Iraqi government
that would have protected our
troops, and the Iraqi government
would not give that.
But let's talk about the
question you asked, Lester. The
question you asked is, what do
we do here in the United States?
That's the most important part
of this. How do we prevent
attacks? How do we
protect our people?
And I think we've got to have an
intelligence surge, where we are
looking for every scrap
of information. I was so proud
of law enforcement in New York,
in Minnesota, in New Jersey.
You know, they responded so
quickly, so professionally to
the attacks that occurred by
Rahami. And
they brought him down. And we
may find out more information
because he is still alive,
which may prove to be an
intelligence benefit.
So we've got to do everything we
can to vacuum up intelligence
from Europe, from the Middle
East. That means we've got to
work more closely with our
allies, and that's something
that
Donald has been
very dismissive of.
We're working with NATO, the
longest military alliance in the
history of the world, to really
turn our attention to terrorism.
We're working with our friends
in the Middle East, many
of which, as you know, are
Muslim majority nations. Donald
has consistently insulted
Muslims abroad, Muslims at home,
when we need to be cooperating
with Muslim nations and
with the American
Muslim community.
They're on the front lines. They
can provide information to us
that we might not get anywhere
else. They need to have close
working cooperation with law
enforcement in these
communities,
not be alienated and pushed away
as some of Donald's rhetoric,
unfortunately, has led
to.
HOLT: Mr. Trump...
TRUMP: Well, I have to respond.
HOLT: Please respond. TRUMP: The
secretary said very strongly
about working with... we've
been working with them for many
years, and we have the greatest
mess anyone's ever seen.
You look at the Middle East,
it's a total mess. Under your
direction, to a large extent.
But you look at the Middle East,
you started the Iran deal,
that's another beauty where
you have a country that was
ready to fall, I mean, they were
doing so badly. They were
choking on the sanctions. And
now they're going to be actually
probably a major power
at some point pretty soon,
the way they're going.
But when you look at NATO, I was
asked on a major show, what do
you think of NATO? And
you have to understand, I'm a
businessperson. I did really
well. But I have common sense.
And I said, well, I'll tell you.
I haven't given lots of thought
to NATO. But two things.
Number one, the 28 countries of
NATO, many of them aren't paying
their fair share. Number
two... and that bothers me,
because we should be asking...
we're defending them, and they
should at least be paying us
what they're supposed to be
paying by treaty and contract.
And, number two, I said, and
very strongly, NATO could be
obsolete, because... and I was
very strong on this, and it was
actually covered very accurately
in the New York Times, which
is unusual for the New York
Times, to be honest but I said,
they do not focus on terror.
And I was very strong. And
I said it numerous times.
And about four months ago, I
read on the front page of the
Wall Street Journal that NATO
is opening up a major terror
division. And I think that's
great. And I think we should
get... because we pay
approximately 73 percent of the
cost of NATO. It's a lot of
money to
protect other people. But I'm
all for NATO. But I said they
have to focus on terror, also.
And they're going to do that.
And that was believe me... I'm
sure I'm not going to
get credit for it... but that
was largely because of what I
was saying and my criticism
of NATO.
I think we have to get NATO to
go into the Middle East with us,
in addition to surrounding
nations, and we have to 22:19:03
knock the hell out of ISIS, and
we have to do it fast,
when ISIS formed in this vacuum
created by Barack Obama and
Secretary Clinton. And believe
me, you were the ones that took
out the troops. Not only that,
you named the day. They couldn't
believe it. They sat back
probably and said, I can't
believe it. They said...
CLINTON: Lester,
we've covered...
TRUMP: No, wait a minute.
CLINTON: We've
covered this ground.
TRUMP: When they formed, when
they formed, this is something
that never should have happened.
It should have never happened.
Now, you're talking about taking
out ISIS. But you were
there, and you were secretary of
state when it was a little
infant. Now it's in over 30
countries. And you're going to
stop them? I don't think so.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, a lot of these
are judgment questions. You had
supported the war in Iraq
before the invasion.
What makes your...
TRUMP: I did not support
the war in Iraq.
HOLT: In 2002...
TRUMP: That is a mainstream
media nonsense put out by her,
because she... frankly, I
think the best person in her
campaign is mainstream media.
HOLT: My question is,
since you supported it...
TRUMP: Just... would
you like to hear...
HOLT: why is your...
Why is your judgment...
TRUMP: Wait a minute. I was
against the war in Iraq. Just so
you put it out.
HOLT: The record shows
otherwise, but why... why was...
TRUMP: The record
does not show that.
HOLT: Why was... is
your judgment any...
TRUMP: The record shows that I'm
right. When I did an interview
with Howard Stern, very
lightly, first time anyone's
asked me that, I said, very
lightly, I don't know, maybe,
who knows? Essentially. I then
did an interview with Neil
Cavuto. We talked about the
economy
is more important. I then spoke
to Sean Hannity, which everybody
refuses to call Sean Hannity.
I had numerous conversations
with Sean Hannity at Fox. And
Sean Hannity said... and he
called
me the other day... and I spoke
to him about it... he said you
were totally against the
war, because he was for the war.
HOLT: Why is your
judgment better than...
TRUMP: And when he... excuse me.
And that was before the war
started. Sean Hannity said
very strongly to me and other
people... he's willing to say
it, but nobody wants to call
him. I was against the war. He
said, you used to have fights
with me, because Sean was in
favor of the war.
And I understand that side,
also, not very much, because we
should have never been there.
But nobody called Sean Hannity.
And then they did an article in
a major magazine, shortly
after the war started. I think
in '04. But they did an article
which had me totally against
the war in Iraq.
And one of your compatriots
said, you know, whether it was
before or right after, Trump
was definitely... because if you
read this article, there's no
doubt. But if somebody
and I'll ask the press... if
somebody would call up Sean
Hannity, this was before the
war started. He and I used to
have arguments about the war. I
said, it's a terrible and
a stupid thing. It's going to
destabilize the Middle East. And
that's exactly what it's
done. It's been a disaster.
HOLT: My reference was to what
you had said in 2002, and my
question was...
TRUMP: No, no. You
didn't hear what I said.
HOLT: Why is your judgment...
why is your judgment any
different than Mrs. Clinton's
judgment?
TRUMP: 22:21:48 Well, I have
much better judgment than she
does. There's no question about
that.
I also have a much better
temperament than she has, you
know?
(LAUGHTER)
I have a much better... she
spent... let me tell you... she
spent hundreds of millions
of dollars on an advertising...
you know, they get Madison
Avenue into a room, they
put names... oh, temperament,
let's go after I think my
strongest asset, maybe by far,
is my temperament. I have a
winning temperament. I know how
to win. She does not have a...
HOLT: Secretary Clinton?
TRUMP: Wait. The AFL-CIO the
other day, behind the blue
screen, I don't know who you
were
talking to, Secretary Clinton,
but you were totally out of
control. I said, there's a
person with a temperament
that's got a problem.
HOLT: Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: Whew, OK.
(LAUGHTER)
Let's talk about two important
issues that were briefly
mentioned by Donald, first,
NATO.
You know, NATO as a military
alliance has something called
Article 5, and basically
it says this: An attack on one
is an attack on all. And you
know the only time it's ever
been invoked? After 9/11, when
the 28 nations of NATO said that
they would go to Afghanistan
with us to fight terrorism,
something that they still are
doing by our side.
With respect to Iran, when I
became secretary of state, Iran
was weeks away from having
enough nuclear material to form
a bomb. They had mastered the
nuclear fuel cycle under
the Bush administration. They
had built covert facilities.
They had stocked them with
centrifuges
that were whirling away.
And we had sanctioned them. I
voted for every sanction against
Iran when I was in the Senate,
but it wasn't enough. So I spent
a year-and-a-half putting
together a coalition that
included
Russia and China to impose the
toughest sanctions on Iran.
And we did drive them to the
negotiating table. And my
successor, John Kerry, and
President
Obama got a deal that put a lid
on Iran's nuclear program
without firing a single shot.
That's diplomacy. That's
coalition-building. That's
working with other nations.
The other day, I saw Donald
saying that there were some
Iranian sailors on a ship in the
waters off of Iran, and they
were taunting American sailors
who were on a nearby ship.
He said, you know, if they
taunted our sailors, 22:24:28
I'd blow them out of the water
and
start another war. That's
not good judgment.
TRUMP: That would
not start a war.
CLINTON: That is not the right
temperament to be
commander-in-chief, to be
taunted.
And the worst part...
TRUMP: No, they
were taunting us.
CLINTON: of what we heard Donald
say has been about nuclear
weapons. He has said repeatedly
that he didn't care if other
nations got nuclear weapons,
Japan, South Korea, even Saudi
Arabia.
It has been the policy of the
United States, Democrats and
Republicans, to do everything
we could to reduce the
proliferation of nuclear
weapons. He even said, well, you
know, if
there were nuclear war in East
Asia, well, you know, that's
fine...
TRUMP: Wrong.
CLINTON: have a
good time, folks.
TRUMP: It's lies.
CLINTON: And, in fact, his
22:25:17 cavalier attitude about
nuclear weapons is so deeply
troubling. That is the
number-one threat we face in the
world. And it becomes
particularly
threatening if terrorists ever
get their hands on any nuclear
material. So a man who can
be provoked by a tweet should
not have his fingers anywhere
near the nuclear codes, as
far as I think anyone with any
sense about this should be
concerned.
TRUMP: That line's getting a
little bit old, I must say. I
would like to...
CLINTON: It's a good one,
though. It well describes the
problem.
(LAUGHTER)
TRUMP: It's not an accurate one
at all. It's not an accurate
one. So I just want to give
a lot of things... and just to
respond. I agree with her on one
thing. The single greatest
problem the world has is nuclear
armament, nuclear weapons,
22:26:04 not global warming,
like you think and your
your president thinks.
Nuclear is the single greatest
threat. Just to go down the
list, we defend Japan, we defend
Germany, we defend South Korea,
we defend Saudi Arabia, we
defend countries. They do
not pay us. But they should be
paying us, because we are
providing tremendous service
and we're losing a fortune.
That's why we're losing... we're
losing... we lose on everything.
I say, who makes these... we
lose on everything. All I said,
that it's very possible that if
they don't pay a fair share,
because this isn't 40 years ago
where we could do what
we're doing. We can't defend
Japan, a behemoth, selling us
cars by the million...
HOLT: We need to move on.
TRUMP: Well, wait, but it's very
important. All I said was, they
may have to defend themselves
or they have to help us out.
We're a country that owes $20
trillion. They have to help
us out.
HOLT: Our last...
TRUMP: As far as the nuclear is
concerned, I agree. It is the
single greatest threat
that this country has.
HOLT: Which leads to my next
question, as we enter our last
segment here (inaudible)
the subject of securing America.
On nuclear weapons, President
Obama reportedly considered
changing the nation's
longstanding policy on first
use. Do you support the current
policy?
Mr. Trump, you have
two minutes on that.
TRUMP: Well, I have to say that,
you know, for what Secretary
Clinton was saying about
nuclear with Russia, she's very
cavalier in the way she talks
about various countries.
But Russia has been expanding
their... they have a much newer
capability than we do. We
have not been updating
from the new standpoint.
I looked the other night. I was
seeing B-52s, they're old enough
that your father, your
grandfather could be flying
them. We are not we are not
keeping up with other countries.
I would like everybody to end
it, just get rid of it. But I
would certainly not do first
strike.
I think that once the nuclear
alternative happens, it's over.
At the same time, we have
to be prepared. I can't take
anything off the table. Because
you look at some of these
countries, you look at North
Korea, we're doing nothing
there. China should solve that
problem for us. 22:28:09 China
should go into North Korea.
China is totally powerful as
it relates to North Korea.
And by the way, another one
powerful is the worst deal I
think I've ever seen negotiated
that you started is the Iran
deal. Iran is one of their
biggest trading partners. Iran
has power over North Korea.
And when they made that horrible
deal with Iran, they should have
included the fact that
they do something with respect
to North Korea. And they should
have done something with respect
to Yemen and all
these other places.
And when asked to Secretary
Kerry, why didn't you do that?
Why didn't you add other things
into the deal? One of the great
giveaways of all time, of all
time, including $400 million
in cash. Nobody's ever seen that
before. That turned out to be
wrong. It was actually $1.7
billion in cash, obviously, I
guess for the hostages. It
certainly looks that way.
So you say to yourself, why
didn't they make the right deal?
This is one of the worst deals
ever made by any country in
history. The deal with Iran will
lead to nuclear problems. All
they have to do is sit back 10
years, and they don't have to do
much.
HOLT: Your two
minutes is expired.
TRUMP: And they're going to end
up getting nuclear. I met with
Bibi Netanyahu the other
day. Believe me, he's
not a happy camper.
HOLT: All right. Mrs. Clinton,
Secretary Clinton, you have two
minutes.
CLINTON: 22:29:30 Well, let
me... let me start by saying,
words matter. Words matter when
you run for president. And they
really matter when you are
president. And I want to
reassure
our allies in Japan and South
Korea and elsewhere that we have
mutual defense treaties and we
will honor them.
It is essential that America's
word be good. And so I know that
this campaign has caused
some questioning and worries on
the part of many leaders across
the globe. I've talked
with a number of them. But I
want to... on behalf of myself,
and I think on behalf of
a majority of the American
people, say that, you know, our
word is good.
It's also important that we look
at the entire global situation.
There's no doubt that we
have other problems with Iran.
But personally, I'd rather deal
with the other problems having
put that lid on their nuclear
program than still to be facing
that.
And Donald never tells you what
he would do. Would he have
started a war? Would he have
bombed Iran? If he's going to
criticize a deal that has been
very successful in giving
us access to Iranian facilities
that we never had before, then
he should tell us what his
alternative would be. But it's
like his plan to defeat ISIS. He
says it's a secret plan,
but the only secret is
that he has no plan.
22:31:04 So we need to be more
precise in how we talk about
these issues. People around
the word follow our presidential
campaigns so closely, trying to
get hints about what
we will do. Can they rely on us?
Are we going to lead the world
with strength and in accordance
with our values? That's what I
intend to do. I intend to be a
leader of our country that
people can count on, both here
at home and around the world, to
make decisions that will
further peace and prosperity,
but also stand up to bullies,
whether they're abroad or at
home.
We cannot let those who would
try to destabilize the world to
interfere with American
interests
and security...
HOLT: Your two minutes is...
CLINTON: to be given
any opportunities at all.
HOLT: is expired.
TRUMP: Lester, one
thing I'd like to say.
HOLT: Very quickly.
Twenty seconds.
TRUMP: I will go very quickly.
But I will tell you that Hillary
will tell you to go
to her website and read all
about how to defeat ISIS, which
she could have defeated by never
having it, you know, get going
in the first place. Right now,
it's getting tougher and
tougher to defeat them, because
they're in more and more places,
more and more states,
more and more nations.
HOLT: Mr. Trump...
TRUMP: And it's a big problem.
And as far as Japan is
concerned, I want to help all
of our allies, but we are losing
billions and billions of
dollars. We cannot be the
policemen of the world. We
cannot protect countries all
over the world...
HOLT: We have just...
TRUMP: where they're not
paying us what we need.
HOLT: We have just a
few final questions...
TRUMP: And she doesn't say that,
because she's got no business
ability. We need heart. We
need a lot of things. But you
have to have some basic ability.
And sadly, she doesn't
have that. All of the things
that she's talking about could
have been taken care of during
the last 10 years, let's say,
while she had great power. But
they weren't taken care of.
And if she ever wins this race,
they won't be taken care of.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, this year
Secretary Clinton became the
22:32:57 first woman nominated
for president by a major party.
Earlier this month, you said she
doesn't have, quote, "a
presidential look." She's
standing here right now. What
did you mean by that?
TRUMP: She doesn't have the
look. She doesn't have the
stamina. I said she doesn't have
the stamina. And I don't believe
she does have the stamina. To be
president of this
country, you need
tremendous stamina.
HOLT: The quote was, "I just
don't think she has the
presidential look."
TRUMP: You have... wait a
minute. Wait a minute, Lester.
You asked me a question. Did you
ask
me a question?
You have to be able to negotiate
our trade deals. You have to be
able to negotiate, that's
right, with Japan, with Saudi
Arabia. I mean, can you imagine,
we're defending Saudi Arabia?
And with all of the money they
have, we're defending them, and
they're not paying? All
you have to do is speak to them.
Wait. You have so many different
things you have to
be able to do, and I don't
believe that Hillary has the
stamina.
HOLT: Let's let her respond.
CLINTON: 22:33:52 Well, as soon
as he travels to 112 countries
and negotiates a peace deal,
a cease-fire, a release of
dissidents, an opening of new
opportunities in nations around
the world, or even spends 11
hours testifying in front of a
congressional committee, he
can talk to me about stamina.
(APPLAUSE)
TRUMP: The world... let me tell
you. Let me tell you. Hillary
has experience, but it's
bad experience. We have made so
many bad deals during the
last... so she's got experience,
that I agree.
(APPLAUSE)
But it's bad, bad experience.
Whether it's the Iran deal that
you're so in love with,
where we gave them $150 billion
back, whether it's the Iran
deal, whether it's anything
you can... name... you almost
can't name a good deal. I agree.
She's got experience,
but it's bad experience. And
this country can't afford to
have another four years of
that kind of experience.
HOLT: We are at... we are
at the final question.
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: Well, one thing.
One thing, Lester.
HOLT: Very quickly, because
we're at the final question now.
CLINTON: You know, he tried to
switch from looks to stamina.
But this is a man who has
called women pigs, slobs and
dogs, and someone who has said
pregnancy is an inconvenience
to employers, who has said...
TRUMP: I never said that.
CLINTON: women don't deserve
equal pay unless they do as good
a job as men.
TRUMP: I didn't say that.
CLINTON: And one of the worst
things he said was about a woman
in a beauty contest. He
loves beauty contests,
supporting them and hanging
around them. And he called this
woman
22:35:35 "Miss Piggy." Then he
called her "Miss Housekeeping,"
because she was Latina.
Donald, she has a name.
TRUMP: Where did you find this?
Where did you find this?
CLINTON: Her name
is Alicia Machado.
TRUMP: Where did you find this?
CLINTON: And she has become a
U.S. citizen, and you can bet...
TRUMP: Oh, really? CLINTON:
she's going to vote this
November.
TRUMP: OK, good. Let
me just tell you...
(APPLAUSE)
HOLT: Mr. Trump, could we just
take 10 seconds and then we ask
the final question...
TRUMP: You know, Hillary is
hitting me with tremendous
commercials. Some of it's said
in entertainment. Some of it's
said... somebody who's been very
vicious to me, Rosie O'Donnell,
I said very tough things to her,
and I think everybody would
agree that she deserves it
and nobody feels sorry for her.
But you want to know the truth?
I was going to say something...
HOLT: Please very quickly.
TRUMP: extremely rough to
Hillary, to her family, and I
said to myself, "I can't
do it. I just can't do it. It's
inappropriate. It's not nice."
But she spent hundreds of
millions of dollars on negative
ads on me, many of which are
absolutely untrue. They're
untrue. And they're
misrepresentations.
And I will tell you this,
Lester: It's not nice. And I
don't deserve that.
22:36:42 But it's certainly not
a nice thing that she's done.
It's hundreds of millions
of ads. And the only gratifying
thing is, I saw the polls come
in today, and with all
of that money...
HOLT: We have to move on
to the final question.
TRUMP: $200 million is spent,
and I'm either winning or tied,
and I've spent practically
nothing.
(APPLAUSE)
HOLT: One of you will not win
this election. So my final
question to you tonight, are you
willing to accept the outcome as
the will of the voters?
Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: Well, I support our
democracy. And sometimes you
win, sometimes you lose. But
I certainly will support the
outcome of this election.
And I know Donald's trying very
hard to plant doubts about it,
but I hope the people out
there understand: This
election's really up to you.
It's not about us so much as it
is
about you and your families and
the kind of country and future
you want. So I sure hope
you will get out and vote as
though your future depended on
it, because I think it does.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, very quickly,
same question. Will you accept
the outcome as the will of
the voters? TRUMP: I want to
make America great again. We are
a nation that is seriously
troubled. We're losing our jobs.
People are pouring into our
country.
The other day, we were deporting
800 people. And perhaps they
passed the wrong button,
they pressed the wrong button,
or perhaps worse than that, it
was corruption, but these
people that we were going to
deport for good reason ended up
becoming citizens. Ended up
becoming citizens. And it was
800. And now it turns out it
might be 1,800, and they don't
even know.
HOLT: Will you accept the
outcome of the election?
TRUMP: Look, here's the story. I
want to make America great
again. I'm going to be able
to do it. I don't believe
Hillary will. The answer is, if
she wins, I will absolutely
support her.
(APPLAUSE)
HOLT: All right. Well, that is
going to do it for us. That
concludes our debate for this
evening, a spirit one. We
covered a lot of ground,
22:38:33 not everything as I
suspected
we would.
The next presidential debates
are scheduled for October 9th at
Washington University in
St. Louis and October 19th at
the University of Nevada Las
Vegas. The conversation will
continue.
A reminder. The vice
presidential debate is scheduled
for October 4th at Longwood
University
in Farmville, Virginia. My
thanks to Hillary Clinton and to
Donald Trump and to Hofstra
University for hosting us
tonight. Good night, everyone.
22:38:58
GWEN IFILL: And that concludes
the first debate between Hillary
Clinton and Donald Trump.
We watched them
there on the stage.
Joining Gwen Ifill and me here
in our studio for some analysis,
syndicated columnist Mark
Shields, New York Times
columnist David Brooks, and Amy
Walter of The Cook Political
Report.
Mark Shields, they did cover a
lot of ground, from jobs to
taxes, from race to ISIS, and
just now women. What did
you make of it all?
MARK SHIELDS: I think that,
first of all, Donald Trump made
it about him, rather than
about the American people.
I think that was missing in his
message. And I really think that
he is remarkable political
figure, in that, if you think
about American presidents,
whether it's Ronald Reagan or
John Kennedy or Barack Obama or
Franklin Roosevelt, there was
always an optimism to them.
That is a very dark and rather
dreary message, that we're
surrounded by people who are not
simply incompetent, but who are
cutting deals, who have
conflicts of interest.
If... Hillary Clinton, I thought
was Hillary Clinton. She was
factual. She was well-organized
in her thinking, not
particularly likable, did not
come across as... did not reveal
much
about herself, other that
anecdote about her dad again and
the nod to the grandchild at
the opening.
I really thought Trump did...
Failed his test of
presidential...
GWEN IFILL: And as we watch the
families come on stage, as is
typical after these debates,
the Clintons, former President
Bill Clinton and Hillary
Clinton, of course. And Chelsea
Clinton is there as well.
And on the other half of the
stage, Melania and Donald Trump,
his sons, his daughters,
others.
Now, Amy, we... I counted... we
counted it up. Hillary Clinton
referred to Donald Trump
by his first name, Donald...
most people call him Mr.
Trump... 22 times. She clearly
had
it in her mind that she wanted
to get under his skin, to bug
him. Did it work?
AMY WALTER: Well, he was on the
defensive much more than he was
on the offense in this
debate, whether it was on
question of the birtherism, on
his taxes, his support for
the Iraq War, the debate about
women, and his things he said
about women, about stamina.
This was a debate in which she
was able... and I think that
Mark is completely right. Trump
made it about himself, but she
helped him to make it about
himself.
Look, she didn't provide the
vision. I think that there are a
lot of folks, even on the
Democratic side, looking for
that sense of, what is the
bigger message of Hillary
Clinton?
She's very smart. She has all of
the facts outlined. She has all
the policy papers up
on her Web site.
But the bigger, sort of cohesive
vision for where we take
America, I just... I don't know
that we still saw
that in this debate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, how do you
see this? Did either one of them
do what they needed
to do tonight?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, it wasn't...
if what they needed to do was
make me feel better about
the country, they failed. It was
the opposite of elevating on
both sides.
I thought, for the first
half-hour, that Donald Trump was
winning. And I thought that was
because, he may be obnoxious,
but he is a change agent. And
the first half-hour was
on his turf.
And her answers, Hillary
Clinton's answers, went it was
on... gets to policy, it can't
just be three things. It has to
be 16 things. And you get in
laundry list mode.
Then she started attacking him.
And she had two devastatingly
good answers, on the birther
issue and the tax return issue,
which were really good assaults
on him. So, even though
she's not good at describing a
policy, she's really good at
going after him.
And then the debate got on, and
Donald Trump became Donald
Trump. And with every answer,
it was digging it a little
deeper. His birther answer was
abysmal, and bunch of bad
answers
all in a row. The race issue was
terrible, the looks issue, bad.
And so he just... at his lack of
preparation, and, frankly, a lot
of his policies and his
character just got worse and
worse and worse. So, I think you
would have to say this was
a Clinton night.
GWEN IFILL: John Yang is in...
at Hofstra University for us
tonight. He's at the site
of tonight's debate.
And I'm wondering what the scene
is like there, John, how it's
going over.
JOHN YANG: Well, I tell you, the
spinners are just coming out.
I'm just in front of
the Donald Trump holding room.
You can see them coming by here.
Before, Senator Claire McCaskill
came by. She's obviously
a supporter of Secretary
Clinton. She was telling me that
she felt... and this is sort
of the line coming out of
their... the Clinton room
tonight... that Donald Trump,
once again,
they say, showed that he wasn't
prepared to be president.
They say that this was... they
say that it came right from the
top, when the secretary
was able to give what they
say... what they're saying was a
coherent policy about providing
jobs in America. But he wasn't.
I tried to... Governor Christie
went by, wouldn't stop. I'm
trying to see if I can get
someone
from the Trump campaign
to get their reaction.
But, so far, that's what
we have gotten so far.
GWEN IFILL: OK, John, we're
going to let you keep searching
for people in the room to talk
to. And we will get back to you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Mark, I want
to come to you, because was
there any... David was saying
that Donald Trump did better in
the first half-hour, when they
talked about jobs, and
he talked about jobs leaving the
country. Did Hillary Clinton
ever have an answer to
that?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I thought...
I mean, she was defensive.
There's no question about it.
She was defensive on the TPP.
But her answer that there were
more manufacturing jobs... she
did the defense of her husband's
economic record, not a very... a
rather tepid defense. There was
a hell of a defense to
be made for Bill Clinton's eight
years of 22 million jobs and the
lowest unemployment
rates for African-Americans in
the history of the country,
balancing the budget.
She did... she just said more
manufacturing jobs in the '90s.
But I want to say, in defense of
Trump, and not to be totally...
I have never heard a
presidential candidate... and I
have heard 40 of them... say,
I'm extremely underleveraged.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: I mean, that was a
rather remarkable statement, if
you think about it.
And when he talked about not
paying taxes, he said, it would
be squandered, too. That's
why he didn't pay any taxes. And
I thought those were... the
explanation, the one that
will be most memorable, was
that, who hacked the DNC? It
wasn't Russia. Could have been
Russia. Could have been China.
Could have been some other
country, or it could have
been someone sitting on the
bed that weighs 400 pounds.
I don't know if the bed weighs
400 pounds or the person weighs
400 pounds.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: And that is your
definition of "in defense of
Donald Trump"?
MARK SHIELDS: That
was it. That was it.
GWEN IFILL: Just checking.
DAVID BROOKS: He touched me.
I'm underleveraged myself.
(CROSSTALK)
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Can we talk a little
bit about the line of
questioning on race?
Because when... I never heard
presidential candidate in the
debate call the person that
he or she is running against,
use the word racist, three
times. And also, when he was
asked about race, Donald Trump
talked about law and order.
What were the dog whistles in
the room? Or maybe they weren't
even dog whistles. Everybody
could hear them.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
Donald Trump's answer, whenever
there's an issue on... whether
it's on race, whether
it's on policing, whether it's
on terrorism, he always comes
back to, it's all about law
and order. We're going to get
the police. We're going to get
stuff done, because that's
how things work.
And we also know that that is an
answer that is not a comfortable
answer for many people
in the African-American
community and in... among
nonwhite voters, about who gets
profiled when
we have stop and frisk programs,
when we have law and order, what
that actually means.
These were questions that were
not the kinds of questions that
Donald Trump answers
particularly
well. But that's not who he's
playing to. We talked about this
a lot during the convention.
Throughout this... throughout
the convention, throughout this
debate, Donald Trump talked
to the same people he's been
talking to this entire campaign.
There are a group of voters
out there who are white, who are
working class who he's done
very, very well with. And those
are voters he expects to take
him all the way throughout this
election.
And he's not interested in
reaching out and getting beyond
that base.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You know, David,
picking up what Amy is saying,
it seems to me that much
of this debate was on territory
where Donald Trump is
uncomfortable, I mean, the whole
birther question. Lester Holt
raised that. He pushed Donald
Trump on that. He pushed
him on his tax returns, which
we have been talking about.
These were areas where Donald
Trump was back against the
ropes.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
I do think Holt was tougher on
Trump than on Clinton. Maybe
there's more to work with
there. And he certainly exposed
some vulnerabilities. The
defense that "I have a country
club in
Palm Beach which allows in
minorities," that's not... that
is not your good defense.
But...
GWEN IFILL: Trump is apparently
already tweeting that there
weren't good questions about
e-mails,
about Benghazi...
DAVID BROOKS: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the
Clinton Foundation.
DAVID BROOKS: And
somewhat fair, actually.
But here is way think it's going
to happen. I think he really
looked bad on some of the
especially some of the racial
stuff, on the gender stuff, a
lot of stuff.
And so I think we can expect his
polls to drop as after the
convention season. But,
as Amy said, that's not his
audience. And, two, he is
thematically so consistent. We
are under assault, we're under
assault, we're under assault.
And it wouldn't surprise me if
he then... his numbers then
began to go up, as they have
in the last couple weeks, with
all this stuff. He's already
said all this before.
GWEN IFILL: I might also add
that, if you want to know, we
have been keeping track of
the things that were true, the
things that were false that were
said tonight on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour. Just go
there and find what all of our
experts, including our
own... well, Margaret Warner,
our own Paul Solman are
telling... answering these
questions.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
Pulling it together.
GWEN IFILL: But facts... facts
seemed to be an important issue
here than... or lack thereof,
tonight, Mark. And that was
also Hillary Clinton's turf.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes. No,
that's where she is.
But she can't give a short
answer. That is a real problem.
There is a little bit of,
let me tell you how much I know.
And I... I don't even know the
capital of Sweden, but
I can tell you what the
principal products of Sweden are
and how long, you know,
Stockholm
and I think that is... but I
have... again, there are moments
in the debate which I think
we can't ignore.
And that is, "You don't learn a
lot from the tax returns, that,
I can tell you," explaining
why he hasn't released his own
taxes, and said paying no
federal taxes makes me smart.
Now, I'm sorry. I mean, the cops
and E-4s in the Marine Corps and
schoolteachers and
registered nurses who pay taxes
every year, I don't know if not
paying taxes for the two
years that he has on the
record is a recommendation.
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: I would agree with
you, if the Republican debates
hadn't happened.
And maybe it's just the
Republican audiences are
different. But the rules are a
little
different this year. And a lot
of things where he says, I'm
smart, I got away with this,
I do think that has some
resonance in a country of
high-end social distrust. And I
do think
some of the rules are a little
different applying to him.
MARK SHIELDS: Do you think those
respectable people who have come
to him in the last few
weeks, I mean, the thoughtful,
have been kind of overlooking
it? Do you think they were
made comfortable tonight?
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: Total squirming.
Total squirming.
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: Yes. And that's
really the question: Did he pass
the judgment test?
But to the point of... which I
don't know that he was able to
pass the judgment, temperament
test. I don't think that that
was he gets high marks on that.
But on the question about where
the country feels that we're
going, we're pretty evenly
divided between whether... and
this is the Wall Street Journal
poll... is our country
losing ground or is our country
making progress? Forty-eight
percent say losing ground.
Forty-five
percent say making progress.
Not surprisingly, among white
Americans, plus-11 losing
ground, among nonwhite
Americans, plus-28
making progress.
And so when you see these
candidates literally talking
past each other, as you pointed
out,
on race issues, on so many other
issues about where we're
going...
GWEN IFILL: Taxes.
AMY WALTER: on taxes, it's
literally we have a country that
is seeing the direction
that we're going in
completely differently.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think all three
of you were saying before the
debate that Hillary Clinton
tonight needed to be more
likable. She needed to... Mark,
what was your term? She needed
to...
MARK SHIELDS: At the end
of it, say, not a bad egg.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Not a bad egg.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: Like to
have in the carpool.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But she
did she do that tonight?
MARK SHIELDS: In
the PTA meeting.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Did
that happen or not?
MARK SHIELDS: No. I don't
think... I don't think she
wasn't unlikable, but she
certainly
there wasn't any...
AMY WALTER: What?
MARK SHIELDS: There wasn't any
point in which you got a peek
into her... who she is, what
makes her tick.
GWEN IFILL: I never hear anybody
ask whether Donald Trump is
likable.
MARK SHIELDS: Oh, sure we do.
GWEN IFILL: Yes?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
MARK SHIELDS: And he's
thoroughly unlikable.
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: It's not
really an open question.
GWEN IFILL: Oh, I
see. Oh, I see.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: Well, the Wall
Street Journal/NBC poll, to come
back to what Amy was just
talking
about, he started 28/59
favorable/unfavorable, and now
he's at 29.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're going
quickly back to Hofstra
university in New York.
Our John Yang is there.
John, you have maybe
found a Trump person?
GWEN IFILL: Hi, John.
JOHN YANG: I have got... we have
been talking to some of the
Trump supporters here now.
They think... and the one point
that they have been repeating
over and over again is
the point, actually, that he
repeated over and over again in
the debate, was hitting
at Clinton as a career
politician, that reinforcing
this idea that he's the... that
career politicians
like Hillary Clinton are the
reason for the problems we're
seeing now.
That's been a signature line of
his campaign and, in many ways,
one reason for a lot of
the support of the campaign. And
that's what we're hearing over
and over again from the
Trump supporters here tonight.
GWEN IFILL: In fact, John, that
was one of the big lines
tonight, which is that she has
experience, but it's bad
experience, right? And so they
are picking up on that.
JOHN YANG: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So...
and, John, thank you.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Go ahead.
JOHN YANG: No, go ahead.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was just going
to bring it back here and say to
David, is that effective?
Is that something that sticks
that he keeps repeating?
DAVID BROOKS: I think
it does, actually.
If you looked at her, just take
him out of the debate, she does
look like a career politician.
She does repeat a lot of things.
She doesn't quite make human
convention... connection.
And in year that's very unusual,
she's not that unusual.
But I thought she did fine, and
with some devastatingly good
assaults. But, again, as
Mark said, he was the subject.
And he did negative.
AMY WALTER: Well, and that's
been the theme throughout this
campaign, right?
Wherever the spotlight goes, if
it's placed on you, the
candidate, you are likely to
drop
in the polls. When the spotlight
gets to the other candidate...
because this race has just
simply been a referendum on who
the worst candidate is, right?
And so when it... if it goes to
the spotlight now on Donald
Trump and how much he was on
defense, it's not going to be
how well Clinton did as much as
how poorly he did. And if it
goes over to Hillary Clinton,
then she becomes the focus. Her
numbers suffer.
And at the end of the day, the
candidate who wins is the
candidate who doesn't get in
that
spotlight for the
last couple of weeks.
GWEN IFILL: Let me ask a
question about just one big
policy issue that he seemed to
land
a few blows on. And that was on
trade, when he kind of basically
made the point that she
had changed her mind. And
he drove that point home.
MARK SHIELDS: He did.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: The question I
had, as he was doing that,
was... are his interruptions a
sign of strength
or obnoxiousness?
But he... there's no question,
he dominated the dialogue. She
was very much playing defense
in the first part there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, as David
said, in the first half-hour, it
seemed to be that he was
getting the better of
a couple of points.
But then, as we moved into the
debate, it seemed to me Hillary
Clinton felt more comfortable
coming after him and
sticking with some...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, she baited
him. There's no question.
AMY WALTER: Oh, yes.
The Donald was baited. And he
not, in that sense, go after her
the way I thought he would.
I thought his own defense of his
positions was really faulty.
GWEN IFILL: Well, time for all
three of you to ask... really
quick answers.
AMY WALTER: Uh-oh.
GWEN IFILL: Expectations in
advance, did they meet your
expectations afterward?
AMY WALTER: Yes, they did.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: No.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: My expectations
have never been met. No.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We may ask you
this question again tomorrow.
David?
DAVID BROOKS: Not a kamikaze
night for him. So, it's not a
career-ender, not a
campaign-ender,
but not a good night.
GWEN IFILL: All right. I think
I gave you, like, one word.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
But I can say... yes, agree that
it was a better night for
Hillary Clinton, but it does
not feel like it was the
defining end-all, be-all of this
campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, hey, we
have only got six weeks to go.
GWEN IFILL: You know what that
means. We are going to have to
come back and do it again
right here at this table, maybe
October 4 for the vice
presidential debate.
That concludes our coverage of
the first presidential debate,
but there's whole lot more, as
we
were saying, online. You can
watch highlights. Plus, see how
"NewsHour" staff, from Margaret
Warner to Paul Solman, as you
were saying, and more put what
the candidates said in context.
That's all at PBS.org/NewsHour.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
And join us right here for the
"NewsHour" tomorrow night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.